(Bugles blaring, drums beating)
As by your high imperialmajesty
I had in charge at mydepart for France,
As procurator to yourexcellence,
To marry Princess Margaretfor your grace,
So, in the famous ancientcity, Tours,
In presence of the Kingsof France and Sicil,
The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber,Bretagne and Alencon,
Seven earls, twelve baronsand twenty reverend bishops,
I have perform'd my taskand was espoused:
And humbly now upon mybended knee,
In sight of England andher lordly peers,
Deliver up my title in thequeen
To your most gracious hands,
that are the substance
Of that great shadowI did represent;
The happiest gift thatever marquess gave,
The fairest queen that everking received. Suffolk, arise.
Welcome, Queen Margaret:
I can express no kindersign of love
Than this kind kiss. OLord, that lends me life,
Lend me a heart repletewith thankfulness!
For thou hast given me inthis beauteous face
A world of earthlyblessings to my soul,
If sympathy of love uniteour thoughts.
Great King of England andmy gracious lord,
The mutual conference thatmy mind hath had,
By day, by night, wakingand in my dreams,
In courtly company or atmy beads,
With you, minealder-liefest sovereign,
Makes me the bolder tosalute my king
With ruder terms, such asmy wit affords
And over-joy of heart dothminister.
Her sight did ravish; buther grace in speech,
Her words y-clad withwisdom's majesty,
Makes me from wonderingfall to weeping joys;
Such is the fulness of myheart's content.
Lords, with one cheerfulvoice welcome my love.
Long live Queen Margaret,England's happiness!
We thank you all.
My lord protector, so itplease your grace,
Here are the articles ofcontracted peace
between our sovereign andthe French king Charles,
For eighteen monthsconcluded by consent.
'Imprimis, it is agreed
between the Frenchking Charles,
and William de la Pole,Marquess of Suffolk,
ambassador for HenryKing of England,
that the said Henry shallespouse the Lady Margaret,
daughter unto Reignier King ofNaples, Sicilia and Jerusalem,
and crown her Queen of England
ere the thirtieth ofMay next ensuing.
Item, that is further agreedthat the duchy of Anjou
and the county of Maineshall be released
and delivered to the kingher father'--
Uncle, how now!
Pardon me, gracious lord;
Some sudden qualm hathstruck me at the heart
And dimm'd mine eyes, thatI can read no more.
Uncle of Winchester, Ipray, read on.
'Item, It is furtheragreed between them,
that the duchies of Anjouand the county of Maine
shall be released and deliveredto the king her father,
and she sent over
of the King of England's ownproper cost and charges,
without having any dowry.'
They please us well. Lordmarquess, kneel down:
We here create thee thefirst duke of Suffolk,
And gird thee with thesword. Cousin of York,
We here discharge your grace
from being regent I'the parts of France,
till term of eighteenmonths be full expired.
Thanks, uncle Winchester,
Gloucester, York,Buckingham, Somerset,
Salisbury, and Warwick;
We thank you all for thegreat favour done,
In entertainment to myprincely queen.
Come, let us in,and with all speed
provide to see hercoronation be perform'd.
(Bugle blaring)
Brave peers of England,pillars of the state,
To you Duke Humphrey mustunload his grief,
Your grief, the commongrief of all the land.
What! did my brother Henryspend his youth,
His valour, coin andpeople, in the wars?
Did he so often lodge inopen field,
In winter's cold andsummer's parching heat,
To conquer France, histrue inheritance?
Have you yourselves,Somerset, Buckingham,
Brave York, Salisbury, andvictorious Warwick,
Received deep scars inFrance and Normandy?
Or hath mine uncleBeaufort and myself,
With all the learnedcouncil of the realm,
Studied so long,
sat in the council-house Earlyand late, debating to and fro
How France and Frenchmenmight be kept in awe,
And shall these laboursand these honours die?
O peers of England,shameful is this league!
Fatal this marriage,cancelling your fame,
Blotting your names frombooks of memory,
Razing the characters ofyour renown,
Defacing monuments ofconquer'd France,
Undoing all, as all hadnever been!
Nephew, what means thispassionate discourse,
This peroration with suchcircumstance?
For France, 'tis ours; andwe will keep it still.
Ay, we will keepit, if we can;
But now it is impossiblewe should:
Suffolk, the new-made dukethat rules the roast,
Hath given the duchy ofAnjou and Maine
Unto the poor King Reignier,
whose large style Agrees notwith the leanness of his purse.
By the death of Himthat died for all,
These counties were thekeys of Normandy.
(Crying)
But wherefore weepsWarwick, my valiant son?
For grief that they arepast recovery:
For, were there hope toconquer them again,
My sword should shed hotblood, mine eyes no tears.
Anjou and Maine! myselfdid win them both;
Those provinces these armsof mine did conquer:
And are the cities, that Igot with wounds,
Delivered up again withpeaceful words?
Mort Dieu!
For Suffolk's duke, may hebe suffocate,
That dims the honour ofthis warlike isle!
France should have tornand rent my very heart,
Before I would haveyielded to this league.
I never read butEngland's kings
have had Large sums of goldand dowries with their wives:
And our King Henrygives away his own,
To match with her thatbrings no vantages.
She should have stayed inFrance and starved
in France.
My Lord of Gloucester, nowye grow too hot:
It was the pleasure of mylord the King.
My Lord of Winchester, Iknow your mind;
'Tis not my speeches thatyou do mislike,
But 'tis my presence thatdoth trouble ye.
Rancour will out:proud prelate,
in thy face I see thyfury: if I longer stay,
We shall begin our ancientbickerings.
Lordings, farewell; andsay, when I am gone,
I prophesied France willbe lost ere long.
So, there goes ourprotector in a rage.
'Tis known to you he ismine enemy,
Nay, more, an enemy untoyou all,
And no great friend, Ifear me, to the king.
Consider, lords, he is thenext of blood,
And heir apparent to theEnglish crown:
Had Henry got an empire byhis marriage,
With all the wealthykingdoms of the west,
There's reason he shouldbe displeased at it.
Look to it, lords!
let not his smoothing wordsbewitch your hearts;
be wise and circumspect.
What though the commonpeople favour him,
Calling him 'Humphrey, thegood Duke of Gloucester,'
Clapping their hands, andcrying with loud voice,
'Jesu maintain your royalexcellence!'
With 'God preserve thegood Duke Humphrey!'
I fear me, lords, for allthis flattering gloss,
He will be found adangerous protector.
Why should he, then,protect our sovereign,
He being of age to governof himself?
Cousin of Somerset, joinyou with me,
And all together, with theDuke of Suffolk,
We'll quickly hoise DukeHumphrey from his seat.
This weighty business willnot brook delay:
I'll to the Duke ofSuffolk presently.
Cousin of Buckingham,
though Humphrey's pride
and greatness of hisplace be grief to us,
Yet let us watch thehaughty cardinal:
His insolence is moreintolerable
Than all the princes inthe land beside:
If Gloucester be displaced,he'll be protector.
Or thou or I, Somerset,will be protector,
Despite Duke Humphrey orthe cardinal.
Pride went before,ambition follows him.
While these do labour fortheir own preferment,
Behoves it us to labourfor the realm.
I never saw but HumphreyDuke of Gloucester
Did bear him like a noblegentleman.
Oft have I seen thehaughty cardinal,
More like a soldier than aman o' the church,
As stout and proud as hewere lord of all,
Swear like a ruffian anddemean himself
Unlike the ruler of acommonweal.
Warwick, my son, thecomfort of my age,
Thy deeds, thy plainnessand thy housekeeping,
Hath won the greatestfavour of the commons,
Excepting none but goodDuke Humphrey:
And, cousin York, thyacts in Ireland,
In bringing them to civildiscipline,
Thy late exploits done inthe heart of France,
When thou wert regent forour sovereign,
Have made thee fear'd andhonour'd of the people:
The reverence of mineage and Nevelle's name
is of no littleforce if I command.
Join we together, for thepublic good,
In what we can, to bridleand suppress
The pride of Suffolk andthe cardinal,
With Somerset's andBuckingham's ambition;
And, as we may, cherishDuke Humphrey's deeds,
While they do tend theprofit of the land.
So God help Warwick, as heloves the land,
And common profit of hiscountry!
And so says York, for hehath greatest cause.
Then let's make haste away,and look unto the main.
Unto the main! O father,Maine is lost;
That Maine which by mainforce Warwick did win,
And would have kept solong as breath did last!
Main chance, father, youmeant; but I meant Maine,
Which I will win fromFrance, or else be slain,
Anjou and Maine are givento the French;
Paris is lost; the stateof Normandy
Stands on a tickle point,now they are gone:
Suffolk concluded on thearticles,
The peers agreed, and Henrywas well pleased to change
two dukedoms for aduke's fair daughter.
I cannot blame them all:what is't to them?
'Tis thine they give away,and not their own.
Pirates may make cheappennyworths of their pillage
And purchase friends andgive to courtezans,
Still revelling like lordstill all be gone;
While as the silly owner ofthe goods weeps over them
and wrings his hapless hands
And shakes his head andtrembling stands aloof,
While all is shared andall is borne away,
Ready to starve and darenot touch his own:
So York must sit and fretand bite his tongue,
While his own lands arebargain'd for and sold.
Anjou and Maine both givenunto the French!
Cold news for me, for Ihad hope of France,
Even as I have of fertileEngland's soil.
A day will come when Yorkshall claim his own;
And therefore I will takethe Nevils' parts
And make a show of love toproud Duke Humphrey,
And, when I spy advantage,claim the crown,
For that's the golden markI seek to hit:
Nor shall proud Lancasterusurp my right,
Nor hold the sceptre inhis childish fist,
Nor wear the diadem uponhis head,
Whose church-like humoursfits not for a crown.
Then, York, be stillawhile, till time do serve:
Watch thou and wake whenothers be asleep,
To pry into the secrets ofthe state;
Till Henry, surfeiting injoys of love,
With his new bride andEngland's dear-bought queen,
And Humphrey with thepeers be fall'n at jars:
Then will I raise aloftthe milk-white rose,
With whose sweet smell theair shall be perfumed;
And in my standard, bearthe arms of York
To grapple with the houseof Lancaster;
And, force perforce, I'llmake him yield the crown,
Whose bookish rule hathpull'd fair England down.
Why droops my lord, likeover-ripen'd corn,
Hanging the head at Ceres'plenteous load?
Why are thine eyes fixedto the sullen earth,
Gazing on that which seemsto dim thy sight?
What seest thou there?King Henry's diadem,
Enchased with all thehonours of the world?
If so, gaze on, and grovelon thy face,
Until thy head be circledwith the same.
Put forth thy hand, reachat the glorious gold.
What, is't too short? I'lllengthen it with mine:
And, having both togetherheaved it up,
We'll both together liftour heads to heaven,
And never more abase oursight so low
As to vouchsafe one glanceunto the ground.
O Nell, sweet Nell, ifthou dost love thy lord,
Banish the canker ofambitious thoughts.
And may that hour, when Iimagine ill against my king
and nephew, virtuous Henry,
Be my last breathing inthis mortal world!
My troublous dream thisnight doth make me sad.
What dream'd my lord? tellme, and I'll requite it
with sweet rehearsal ofmy morning's dream.
Methought this staff, mineoffice-badge in court,
Was broke in twain; bywhom I have forgot,
But, as I think, it was bythe cardinal;
And on the pieces of thebroken wand
Were placed the heads ofEdmund Duke of Somerset,
And William de la Pole,first duke of Suffolk.
This was my dream: what itdoth bode, God knows.
Tut, this was nothing butan argument
That he that breaks a stickof Gloucester's grove
Shall lose his head forhis presumption.
But list to me, myHumphrey, my sweet duke:
Methought I sat in seat ofmajesty
In the cathedral church ofWestminster,
And in that chair where kingsand queens are crown'd;
Where Henry and dameMargaret kneel'd to me
And on my head did set thediadem.
Art thou not second womanin the realm,
And the protector's wife,beloved of him?
Hast thou not worldlypleasure at command,
Above the reach or compassof thy thought?
And wilt thou still behammering treachery,
To tumble down thy husbandand thyself
From top of honour todisgrace's feet?
Away from me, and let mehear no more!
What, what, my lord! are youso choleric with Eleanor,
for telling but her dream?
Next time I'll keep mydreams unto myself,
And not be cheque'd.
Nay, be not angry; I ampleased again.
My lord protector,
'tis his highness'pleasure you do prepare
to ride unto Saint Alban's,
Where as the king andqueen do mean to hawk.
I go. Come, Nell, thouwilt ride with us?
Yes, my good lord, I'llfollow presently.
Follow I must; I cannot gobefore,
While Gloucester bearsthis base and humble mind.
Were I a man, a duke, andnext of blood,
I would remove thesetedious stumbling-blocks
And smooth my way upontheir headless necks;
And, being a woman, I willnot be slack
To play my part inFortune's pageant.
Where are you there? SirJohn! nay, fear not, man,
We are alone; here's nonebut thee and I.
Jesus preserve your royalmajesty!
What say'st thou? majesty!I am but grace.
But, by the grace of God,and Hume's advice,
Your grace's titles shallbe multiplied.
What say'st thou, man?
hast thou as yet conferr'dWith Margery Jourdain,
the witch of I,With Bolingbroke,
the cunning conjurer? And willthey undertake to do me good?
This they have promised me,to show your highness
A spirit raised from depthof under-ground,
That shall make answer tosuch questions
As by your grace shall bepropounded him.
It is enough; I'll thinkupon the questions:
When from St. Alban's wedo make return,
We'll see these thingseffected to the full.
Here, Hume, take thisreward; make merry, man,
With thy confederates inthis weighty cause.
Hume must make merry withthe duchess' gold;
(Laughing)
Marry, and shall. But hownow, Sir John Hume!
Seal up your lips, andgive no words but mum:
The business asketh silentsecrecy.
Dame Eleanor gives gold tobring the witch:
Gold cannot come amiss,were she a devil.
Yet have I gold flies fromanother coast;
I dare not say, from therich cardinal
And from the great andnew-made Duke of Suffolk,
Yet I do find it so; forto be plain,
They, knowing DameEleanor's aspiring humour,
Have hired me to underminethe duchess
And buz these conjurationsin her brain.
They say 'A crafty knavedoes need no broker;'
Yet am I Suffolk and thecardinal's broker.
Hume, if you take not heed,
you shall go nearto call them both
a pair of crafty knaves.
Well, so it stands;and thus, I fear,
at last Hume's knavery willbe the duchess' wreck,
And her attainture will beHumphrey's fall:
Sort how it will, I willhave gold for all.
(Laughing)
My masters, let's stand close:
my lord protector willcome this way by and by,
and then we may deliver oursupplications in the quill.
Marry, the Lord protecthim, for he's a good man!
Jesu bless him!
Here a' comes, methinks,and the queen with him.
I'll be the first, sure.
Come back, fool; this isthe Duke of Suffolk,
and not my lord protector.
How now, fellow! would'stanything with me?
Pardon me my lord; I tookye for my lord protector.
'To my Lord Protector!' Are yoursupplications to his lordship?
Let me see them:
what is thine?
Pardon me maam. Mine is,an't please your grace,
against John Goodman, mylord cardinal's man,
for keeping my house, and lands,and wife and all, from me.
Thy wife, too! that'ssome wrong, indeed.
What's yours? What's here!
'Against the Duke ofSuffolk, for enclosing the
commons of Long Melford.' Hownow, sir knave!
Alas, sir,
I am but a poor petitionerof our whole township.
Against my master,Thomas Horner,
for saying that the Dukeof York was rightful
heir to the crown.
What sayst thou? did the Dukeof York say he was rightful
heir to the crown?
That my master was? no,forsooth: my master said
that he was, and that theking was an userer.
A usurper, thou would'st say.
Ay usurper user
Who is there?
Take this fellow in,
and send for his master witha presently: we'll hear
more of your matter beforethe King.
And as for you, that loveto be protected
Under the wings of ourprotector's grace,
Begin your suits anew, andsue to him.
Away, base cullions!Suffolk, let him go.
Come, let's be gone.
My Lord of Suffolk, say,is this the guise,
Is this the fashion in thecourt of England?
Is this the government ofBritain's isle,
And this the royalty ofAlbion's king?
What shall King Henry be apupil still
Under the surlyGloucester's governance?
Am I a queen in title andin style,
And must be made a subjectto a duke?
I tell thee, Pole, when inthe city Tours
Thou ran'st a tilt inhonour of my love
And stolest away theladies' hearts of France,
I thought King Henry hadresembled thee in courage,
courtship and proportion:
But all his mind isbent to holiness,
To number Ave-Maries onhis beads;
His champions are theprophets and apostles,
His weapons holy saws ofsacred writ,
His study is histilt-yard, and his loves
Are brazen images ofcanonized saints.
I would the college of thecardinals
Would choose him pope, andcarry him to Rome,
And set the triple crownupon his head:
That were a state fit forhis holiness.
Madam, be patient: as Iwas cause
Your highness came to England,
so will I In England workyour grace's full content.
Beside the haughty protector,have we Beaufort,
The imperious churchman,Somerset, Buckingham,
And grumbling York: andnot the least of these
But can do more in Englandthan the king.
And he of these that cando most of all
Cannot do more in Englandthan the Nevils:
Salisbury and Warwick areno simple peers.
Not all these lords do vexme half so much
As that proud dame, thelord protector's wife.
She sweeps it through thecourt with troops of ladies,
More like an empress thanDuke Humphrey's wife:
Strangers in court do takeher for the queen:
She bears a duke'srevenues on her back,
And in her heart shescorns our poverty:
Shall I not live to beavenged on her?
Contemptuous base-borncallet as she is,
She vaunted 'mongst herminions t'other day,
The very train of herworst wearing gown
Was better worth than allmy father's lands,
Till Suffolk gave twodukedoms for his daughter.
Madam, myself have limed abush for her,
And placed a quire of suchenticing birds,
That she will light tolisten to the lays,
And never mount to troubleyou again.
So, let her rest: and,madam, list to me;
For I am bold to counselyou in this.
Although we fancy not thecardinal,
Yet must we join with himand with the lords,
Till we have brought DukeHumphrey in disgrace.
As for the Duke of York,this late complaint
Will make but little forhis benefit.
So, one by one, we'll weedthem all at last,
And you yourself shallsteer the happy helm.
For my part, noble lords,I care not which;
Or Somerset or York, all'sone to me.
(Bugles play)
If York have ill demean'dhimself in France,
Then let him be denay'dthe regentship.
If Somerset be unworthy ofthe place,
Let York be regent; I willyield to him.
Whether your grace beworthy, yea or no,
Dispute not that: York isthe worthier.
Ambitious Warwick, let thybetters speak.
The cardinal's not mybetter in the field.
All in this presence arethy betters, Warwick.
Warwick may live to be thebest of all.
Peace, son! and show somereason, Buckingham,
Why Somerset should bepreferred in this.
Because the king,forsooth, will have it so.
Madam, the king is old enoughhimself to give his censure:
these are no women's matters.
If he be old enough,what needs your grace
To be protector of hisexcellence?
Madam, I am protector ofthe realm;
And, at his pleasure, willresign my place.
Resign it then and leavethine insolence.
Since thou wert king--aswho is king but thou?--
The commonwealth hathdaily run to wreck;
The Dauphin hath prevail'dbeyond the seas;
And all the peers andnobles of the realm
Have been as bondmen tothy sovereignty.
The commons hast thou rack'd;
the clergy's bags Are lank andlean with thy extortions.
Thy sumptuous buildingsand thy wife's attire
Have cost a mass of publictreasury.
Thy cruelty in execution
Upon offenders, hathexceeded law,
And left thee to the mercyof the law.
They sale of offices andtowns in France,
If they were known, as thesuspect is great,
Would make thee quicklyhop without thy head.
Give me my fan: what,minion! can ye not?
I cry you mercy, madam;was it you?
Was't I! yea, I it was,proud Frenchwoman:
Could I come near yourbeauty with my nails,
I'd set my tencommandments in your face.
Sweet aunt, be quiet;'twas against her will.
Against her will! goodking, look to't in time;
She'll hamper thee, anddandle thee like a baby:
Though in this place mostmaster wear no breeches,
She shall not strike DameEleanor unrevenged.
Lord cardinal, I willfollow Eleanor,
And listen after Humphrey,how he proceeds:
She's tickled now; herfury needs no spurs,
She'll gallop far enoughto her destruction.
Now, lords, my cholerbeing over-blown
With walking once aboutthe quadrangle,
I come to talk ofcommonwealth affairs.
As for your spiteful falseobjections,
Prove them, and I lie opento the law:
But God in mercy so dealwith my soul,
As I in duty love my kingand country!
But, to the matter that wehave in hand:
I say, my sovereign, Yorkis meetest man
To be your regent in therealm of France.
Before we make election,
give me leave to show somereason, of no little force,
That York is most unmeetof any man.
I'll tell thee, Suffolk,why I am unmeet:
First, for I cannotflatter thee in pride;
Next, if I be appointedfor the place,
My Lord of Somerset willkeep me here,
Without discharge, money,or furniture,
Till France be won intothe Dauphin's hands:
Last time, I dancedattendance on his will
Till Paris was besieged,famish'd, and lost.
That can I witness; and afouler fact
Did never traitor in theland commit.
Peace, headstrong Warwick!
Image of pride, why shouldI hold my peace?
Because here is a manaccused of treason:
Pray God the Duke of Yorkexcuse himself!
Doth any one accuse Yorkfor a traitor?
What mean'st thou, Suffolk;tell me, what are these?
Please it your majesty,this is the man
That doth accuse hismaster of high treason:
His words were these: thatRichard, Duke of York,
Was rightful heir unto theEnglish crown
And that your majesty wasa usurper.
Say, man, were these thywords?
An't shall please your majesty,
I never said nor thoughtany such matter:
God is my witness, I am falselyaccused by the villain.
By these ten bones, my lords,he did speak them to me
in the garret one night,as we were scouring my
Lord of York's armour.
Base dunghill villain andmechanical,
I'll have thy head forthis thy traitor's speech.
I do beseech your royalmajesty,
Let him have all the rigorof the law.
Alas, my lord, hang me, ifever I spake the words.
My accuser is my 'prentice;and when I did correct
him for his fault the otherday, he did vow upon his knees
he would be even with me: Ihave good witness of this:
therefore I beseechyour majesty,
do not cast away an honest manfor a villain's accusation.
Uncle, what shall wesay to this in law?
This doom, my lord, if Imay judge my case:
Let Somerset be regentover the French,
Because in York thisbreeds suspicion:
And let these have a dayappointed them
For single combat inconvenient place,
For he hath witness of hisservant's malice:
This is the law, and thisDuke Humphrey's doom.
I humbly thank your royalmajesty.
And I accept the combatwillingly.
Alas, my lord, I cannot fight;for God's sake, pity my case.
The spite of manprevaileth against me.
O Lord, have mercy upon me!
I shall never be able to fighta blow. O Lord, my heart!
Sirrah, or you must fight,or else be hang'd.
Away with them to prison;and the day of combat
shall be the lastof the next month.
Come, Somerset, we'llsee thee sent away.
(Cymbals clanging)
Come master Bolingbroke;the duchess, I tell you,
expects performanceof your promises.
Master Hume, we aretherefore provided:
will her ladyship beholdand hear our exorcisms?
Ay, what else? fearyou not her courage.
I have heard her reported to be
a woman of anexceptional spirit:
but it shall be convenient,
Master Hume, that yoube by her aloft,
while we be busy below; and so,I pray you, go, in God's name,
and leave us.
Mother Jourdain,
be you prostrate and grovel onthe earth; John Southwell,
read you; and let us toour work.
Well said, my masters;
To this gear thesooner the better.
Patience, good lady;wizards know their times:
(drumming)
Deep night, dark night,the silent of the night,
The time of night whenTroy was set on fire;
The time when screech-owlscry and ban-dogs howl,
And spirits walk and ghostsbreak up their graves,
That time best fits thework we have in hand.
Madam, stay you and fearnot: whom we raise,
We will make fast within ahallow'd verge.
(chanting magic spell)
Adsum,
Asmath,
By the eternal God, whosename and power
Thou tremblest at, answerthat I shall ask;
For, till thou speak, thoushalt not pass from hence.
Ask what thou wilt. That Ihad said and done!
'First of the king: whatshall of him become?'
The duke yet lives thatHenry shall depose;
Yet him outlive, and die aviolent death.
Tell me 'What fate awaits theDuke of Suffolk?'
By water shall he die, andtake his end.
'What shall betide theDuke of Somerset?'
Let him shun castles;
Safer shall he be upon thesandy plains
Than where castles mountedstand.
Have done, for more Ihardly can endure.
Descend to darkness andthe burning lake!
False fiend, avoid!
Lay hands upon thesetraitors and their trash.
Beldam, I think we watch'dyou at an inch.
What, madam, are you there?the king and commonweal
Are deeply indebted forthis piece of pains:
My lord protector will, Idoubt it not,
See you well guerdon'd forthese good deserts.
Not half so bad as thineto England's king,
Injurious duke, thatthreatest where's no cause.
True, madam, none at all:what call you this?
Away with them! let thembe clapp'd up close.
And kept asunder. You,madam, shall with us.
take her to thee.
We'll see your trinketshere all forthcoming.
All, away!
Lord Buckingham, methinks,you watch'd her well:
A pretty plot, well chosento build upon!
Now, pray, my lord, let'ssee the devil's writ.
What have we here?
'The duke yet lives, thatHenry shall depose;
But him outlive, anddie a violent death.'
'Tell me what fate awaitsthe Duke of Suffolk?
By water shall he die, andtake his end.
What shall betide the Dukeof Somerset?
Let him shun castles;
Safer shall he be upon thesandy plains
Than where castles mountedstand.'
(Laughing) Come, come, my lords;
These oracles are hardlyattain'd,
And hardly understood.
The king is now in progresstowards Saint Alban's,
With him the husbandof this lovely lady:
Thither go these news, as fastas horse can carry them:
A sorry breakfast for mylord protector.
Your grace shall give meleave, my Lord of York,
To be the post, in hope ofhis reward.
At your pleasure, my good lord.
Within there, ho!
Invite my Lords ofSalisbury and Warwick
To sup with me to-morrownight. Away!
(cheering and horns)
Believe me, lords, forflying at the brook,
I saw not better sportthese seven years' day:
But what a point, my lord,your falcon made,
And what a pitch she flewabove the rest!
To see how God in all hiscreatures works!
Yea, man and birds arefain of climbing high.
No marvel, an it like yourmajesty,
My lord protector's hawksdo tower so well;
They know their masterloves to be aloft,
And bears his thoughtsabove his falcon's pitch.
My lord, 'tis but a baseignoble mind
That mounts no higher thana bird can soar.
I thought as much; hewould be above the clouds.
Ay, my lord cardinal? howthink you by that?
Were it not good yourgrace could fly to heaven?
The treasury ofeverlasting joy.
Thy heaven is on earth;thine eyes and thoughts
Beat on a crown, thetreasure of thy heart;
Pernicious protector,dangerous peer,
That smooth'st it so withking and commonweal!
Churchmen so hot? Gooduncle, can you do it?
To hide such malice withsuch holiness?
No malice, sir; no morethan well becomes
So good a quarrel and sobad a peer.
As who, my lord?
Why, as yourself, my lord,
An't like your lordlylord-protectorship.
Why, Suffolk, Englandknows thine insolence.
And thy ambition,Gloucester.
I prithee, peace, goodqueen,
And whet not on thesefurious peers;
For blessed are thepeacemakers on earth.
Let me be blessed for thepeace I make,
Against this proudprotector, with my sword!
Faith, holy uncle,
would 'twere come to that!
Marry, when thou darest.
Dare? Until thee priest,
plantagenets couldnever brook the dare.
I am plantagenet as well asthou.
And son to John of Gaunt.
In bastardy.
I scorn thy words.
Make up no factiousnumbers for the matter;
In thine own person answerthy abuse.
Ay, where thou darest not peep:
an if thou darest,
This evening, on theeast side of the grove.
How now, my lords!
Believe me, cousinGloucester,
Had not your man put upthe fowl so suddenly,
We had had more sport.
Come with thy two-handsword.
True, uncle.
Are ye well advised?
The east side of the grove?
I am with you.
Why, how now, uncleGloucester!
Talking of hawking;nothing else, my lord.
Now, by God's mother, priest,I'll shave your crown for this,
Protector, see to't well,protect thyself.
The winds grow high; so doyour stomachs, lords.
How irksome is this musicto my heart!
When such strings jar,what hope of harmony?
I pray, my lords, let mecompound this strife.
(commotion in background)
What noise is this?
Fellow, what miracle dostthou proclaim?
A miracle! a miracle!
Come to the king and tellhim what miracle.
Forsooth, a blind man atSaint Alban's shrine,
Within this half-hour,hath received his sight;
A man that ne'er saw inhis life before.
Now, God be praised, thatto believing souls
Gives light in darkness,comfort in despair!
(crowd chanting)
Here comes the townsmen onprocession,
To present your highnesswith the man.
Great is his comfort inthis earthly vale,
Although by his sight hissin be multiplied.
(men singing) A miracle! Amiracle!
Stand by, my masters:bring him near the king;
His highness' pleasure isto talk with him.
Good fellow, tell us herethe circumstance,
That we for thee mayglorify the Lord.
What, hast thou been longblind and now restored?
Born blind, an't pleaseyour grace.
Ay, indeed, was he.
What woman is this?
His wife, an't like yourworship.
Hadst thou been his mother,thou couldst have better told.
Where wert thou born?
At Berwick in the north,an't like your grace.
Poor soul, God's goodnesshath been great to thee:
Let never day nor nightunhallow'd pass,
But still remember whatthe Lord hath done.
Tell me, good fellow,camest thou here by chance,
Or of devotion, to thisholy shrine?
God knows, of puredevotion; being call'd
A hundred times andoftener, in my sleep,
By good Saint Alban; whosaid, 'Saunder, come,
Come, offer at my shrine,and I will help thee.'
Most true, forsooth; andmany time and oft
Myself have heard a voiceto call him so.
What, art thou lame?
Ay, God Almighty help me!
How camest thou so?
A fall off of a tree.
A plum-tree, master.
How long hast thou beenblind?
Born so, master.
What, and wouldst climb atree?
But that in all my life,when I was a youth.
Too true; and bought hisclimbing very dear.
Mass, thou lovedst plums well,that wouldst venture so.
Alas, good master, my wifedesired some damsons,
And made me climb, withdanger of my life.
A subtle knave! but yet itshall not serve.
Let me see thine eyes:wink now: now open them:
In my opinion yet thouseest not well.
Yes, master, clear as day, Ithank God and Saint Alban.
Say'st thou me so? Whatcolour is this cloak of?
Red, master; red as blood.
Why, that's well said.What colour is this gown of?
Black, forsooth:coal-black as jet.
Why, then, thou know'stwhat colour jet is of?
And yet, I think, jet didhe never see.
But cloaks and gowns,before this day, a many.
Never, before this day, inall his life.
Tell me, sirrah, what's myname?
Alas, master, I know not.
What's his name?
I know not.
Nor his?
No, indeed, master.
What's thine own name?
Saunder Simpcox, an if itplease you, master.
Then, Saunder, sit there, thelyingest knave in Christendom.
If thou hadst been born blind,
thou mightest as well haveknown all our names as thus to
name the severalcolours we do wear.
Sight may distinguishof colours,
but suddenly to nominatethem all, it is impossible.
Saint Alban here hathdone a miracle;
and might ye not thinkhis cunning to be great,
that could restore thiscripple to his legs?
O master, that you could!
My masters of Saint Alban's,
have you not a beadle in yourtown, and things called whips?
Yes, my lord.
Send for onepresently.
Sirrah, go fetch thebeadle hither straight.
Now fetch me a stool hitherby and by. Now, sirrah,
if you mean to saveyourself from whipping,
leap me over thisstool and run.
Alas, master, I am notable to stand alone:
You go about to torture mein vain.
Well we must haveyou find your legs.
Whip him till heleap over that same stool.
Come on, sirrah; off withyour doublet quickly.
Alas, master, what shall Ido? I am not able to stand.
(Man screams. Crowd chants) Amiracle!!
O God, seest Thou this,and bearest so long?
It made me laugh to seethe villain run.
Follow the knave; and takethis drab away.
Alas, sir, we did it forpure need.
Let them be whipped throughevery market-town,
till they come to Berwick,from whence they came.
Duke Humphrey has done amiracle to-day.
True; made the lame toleap and fly away.
But you have done moremiracles than I;
You made in a day, mylord, whole towns to fly.
What tidings with ourcousin Buckingham?
Such as my heart dothtremble to unfold.
A sort of naughty persons,lewdly bent,
Under the countenance andconfederacy of Lady Eleanor,
the protector's wife,
The ringleader and head ofall this rout,
Have practised dangerouslyagainst your state,
Dealing with witches andwith conjurers:
Whom we have apprehendedin the fact;
Raising up wicked spiritsfrom under ground,
Demanding of King Henry'slife and death,
And other of yourhighness' privy-council;
As more at large yourgrace shall understand.
O God, what mischiefs workthe wicked ones,
Heaping confusion on theirown heads thereby!
Gloucester, see here thetainture of thy nest.
And look thyself befaultless, thou wert best.
Madam, for myself, toheaven I do appeal,
How I have loved my kingand commonweal:
And, for my wife, I knownot how it stands;
Sorry I am to hear what Ihave heard:
Noble she is, but if shehave forgot
Honour and virtue andconversed with such
As, like to pitch, defilenobility,
I banish her my bed andcompany
And give her as a prey tolaw and shame,
That hath dishonour'dGloucester's honest name.
Well, for this night wewill repose us here:
To-morrow toward Londonback again,
To look into this businessthoroughly
And call these fouloffenders to their answers
And poise the cause injustice' equal scales,
Whose beam stands sure, whoserightful cause prevails.
Now, my good Lords ofSalisbury and Warwick,
Our simple supper ended,give me leave
In this close walk tosatisfy myself,
In craving your opinion ofmy title,
Which is infallible, toEngland's crown.
My lord, I long to hear itat full.
Sweet York, begin: and ifthy claim be good,
The Nevils are thysubjects to command.
Then thus:
Edward the Third, mylords, had seven sons:
The first, the Black Princedied before his father
and left behind him,Richard, his only son.
Who after Edward the Third'sdeath reign'd as king;
Till Henry Bolingbroke, The sonand heir of John of Gaunt,
the fourth of Edward's sons
Seized on the realm,deposed the rightful king,
Sent his poor queen toFrance, from whence she came,
And him to Pomfret; where,as all you know,
Harmless Richard wasmurder'd traitorously.
Father, the duke of York hathtold the truth:
Thus got the house ofLancaster the crown.
Which now they hold byforce and not by right;
For Richard, the firstson's heir, being dead,
The issue of the next sonshould have reign'd.
But William of Hatfielddied without an heir.
The third son, Duke ofClarence, from whose line
I claimed the crown, hadissue, Philippe, a daughter,
Who married EdmundMortimer, Earl of March:
Edmund had issue, RogerEarl of March;
Roger had issue, Edmund,Anne and Eleanor.
This Edmund, in the reignof Bolingbroke,
As I have read, laid claimunto the crown;
And therefore was kept captivetil he died
But to the rest.
His eldest sister, Anne,
My mother, being heir untothe crown
Married RichardEarl of Cambridge;
who was son to Edmund Langley,Edward the Third's fifth son.
By her I claim the kingdom:
she was heir To Roger Earlof March, who was the son
Of Edmund Mortimer, whomarried Philippe,
Sole daughter unto LionelDuke of Clarence:
So, if the issue of the elderson succeed before the younger,
I am king.
What plain proceeding ismore plain than this?
Henry doth claim the crownfrom John of Gaunt,
The fourth son; Yorkclaims it from the third.
Till Lionel's issue fails,his should not reign:
It fails not yet, butflourishes in thee
And in thy sons, fairslips of such a stock.
Then, father Salisbury,kneel we together;
And in this private plotbe we the first
That shall salute ourrightful sovereign
With honour of hisbirthright to the crown.
Long live our sovereignRichard, England's king!
We thank you, lords. But Iam not your king
Till I be crown'd and thatmy sword be stain'd
With heart-blood of thehouse of Lancaster;
And that's not suddenly tobe perform'd,
But with advice and silentsecrecy.
Do you as I do in thesedangerous days:
Wink at the Duke ofSuffolk's insolence,
At Beaufort's pride, atSomerset's ambition,
At Buckingham and all thecrew of them,
Till they have snared theshepherd of the flock,
That virtuous prince, thegood Duke Humphrey:
'Tis that they seek, andthey in seeking that
Shall find their deaths,if York can prophesy.
My lord, break we off; weknow your mind at full.
My heart assures me thatthe Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make theDuke of York a king.
And, Nevil, this I doassure myself:
Richard shall live to makethe Earl of Warwick
The greatest man inEngland but the king.
Stand forth, Dame EleanorCobham, Gloucester's wife:
In sight of God and us,your guilt is great:
Receive the sentence ofthe law for sins
Such as by God's book areadjudged to death.
You four, from hence toprison back again;
From thence unto the placeof execution:
The witch in Smithfieldshall be burn'd to ashes,
And you three shall bestrangled on the gallows.
You, madam, for you aremore nobly born,
Despoiled of your honourin your life,
Shall, after three days'open penance done,
Live in your country herein banishment,
With Sir John Stanley, inthe Isle of Man.
Welcome is banishment;welcome were my death.
Eleanor, the law, thousee'st, hath judged thee:
I cannot justify whom thelaw condemns.
(old woman laughs)
I beseech your majesty,give me leave to go;
Sorrow would solace andmine age would ease.
Stay, Humphrey Duke ofGloucester: ere thou go,
Give up thy staff: Henry willto himself protector be;
and God shall be my hope,
My stay, my guide andlantern to my feet:
And go in peace, Humphrey,no less beloved
Than when thou wertprotector to thy King.
I see no reason why a kingof years
Should be to be protectedlike a child.
God and King Henry governEngland's realm.
Give up your staff, sir,and the king his realm.
My staff? here, nobleHenry, is my staff:
As willingly do I the sameresign
As e'er thy father Henrymade it mine;
And even as willingly atthy feet I leave it
As others wouldambitiously receive it.
Farewell, good king: whenI am dead and gone,
May honourable peaceattend thy throne!
Why, now is Henry king,and Margaret queen;
And Humphrey Duke ofGloucester scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd amaim; two pulls at once;
His lady banish'd, and alimb lopp'd off.
This staff of honourraught, there let it stand
Where it best fits to be,in Henry's hand.
Thus droops this loftypine and hangs his sprays;
Thus Eleanor's pride diesin her youngest days.
Lords, let him go. Pleaseit your majesty,
This is the day appointedfor the combat;
And ready are theappellant and defendant,
The armourer and his man,to enter the lists,
So please your highness tobehold the fight.
Ay, good my lord; forpurposely therefore
Left I the court, to seethis quarrel tried.
O God's name, see thelists and all things fit:
Here let them end it; andGod defend the right!
Here, neighbour Horner, I drinkto you in a cup of sack:
and fear not, neighbour,you shall do well enough.
And here, neighbour,here's a cup of charneco.
And here's a pot of gooddouble beer, neighbour:
drink, and fear not yourman.
Let it come, i' faith,and I'll pledge you all;
and a fig for Peter!
First 'Prentice Here,Peter, I drink to thee:
and be not afraid.
Second 'Prentice Be merry,Peter, and fear not thy master:
fight for credit ofthe 'prentices.
I thank you all: drink, andpray for me, I pray you;
for I think I have taken mylast draught in this world.
Here, Robin, an if I die,I give thee my apron:
and, Will, thou shalthave my hammer:
and here, Tom, take allthe money that I have.
O Lord bless me! I pray God!for I am never able to deal
with my master, he hath learntme so much fence already.
Come, leave your drinking,and fall to blows.
Sirrah, what's thy name?
Peter, forsooth.
Peter! what more?
Thump.
Thump! then see thou thumpthy master well.
Masters, I am comehither, as it were,
at my man's instigation,
to prove him a knave andmyself an honest man:
and touching the Duke of York,
I will take my death, Inever meant him any ill,
nor the king, nor thequeen: and therefore,
Peter, have at theewith a downright blow!
Dispatch: this knave'stongue begins to double.
Sound, trumpets, alarum tothe combatants!
(trumpets sound)
Hold, Peter, hold! Iconfess, I confess treason.
Take away his weapon.Fellow, thank God,
and the good wine inthy master's way.
O God, have I overcome mineenemy in this presence?
O Peter, thou hastprevailed in right!
Go, take hence thattraitor from our sight;
For by his death we doperceive his guilt:
And God in justice hathrevealed to us
The truth and innocence ofthis poor fellow,
Which he had thought tohave murder'd wrongfully.
Come, fellow, follow usfor thy reward.
Thus sometimes hath thebrightest day a cloud;
And after summer evermoresucceeds barren winter,
with his wrathful nipping cold:
So cares and joys abound,as seasons fleet.
Sirs, what's o'clock?
Ten, my lord.
Ten is the hour that wasappointed me
To watch the coming of mypunish'd duchess:
Uneath may she endure theflinty streets,
To tread them with hertender-feeling feet.
Soft! I think shecomes; and I'll prepare
My tear-stain'd eyes tosee her miseries.
So please your grace, we'lltake her from the sheriff.
No, stir not, for yourlives; let her pass by.
Come you, my lord, to seemy open shame?
Now thou dost penance too.Look how they gaze!
See how the giddymultitude do point,
And nod their heads, andthrow their eyes on thee!
Ah, Gloucester, hide theefrom their hateful looks,
And, in thy closet pentup, rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies,both mine and thine!
Be patient, gentle Nell;forget this grief.
Ah, Gloucester, teach meto forget myself!
Trow'st thou that e'erI'll look upon the world,
Or count them happy thatenjoy the sun?
No; dark shall be my lightand night my day;
To think upon my pompshall be my hell.
Sometime I'll say, I amDuke Humphrey's wife,
And he a prince and rulerof the land:
Yet so he ruled and such aprince he was
As he stood by whilst I,his forlorn duchess,
Was made a wonder and apointing-stock
To every idle rascalfollower.
But be thou mild and blushnot at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing tillthe axe of death
Hang over thee, as, sure,it shortly will;
For Suffolk, he that cando all in all
With her that hateth theeand hates us all,
And York and impiousBeaufort, that false priest,
Have all limed bushes tobetray thy wings,
And, fly thou how thoucanst, they'll tangle thee:
But fear not thou, untilthy foot be snared,
Nor never seek preventionof thy foes.
Ah, Nell, forbear! thouaimest all awry;
I must offend before I beattainted;
And had I twenty times somany foes,
And each of them hadtwenty times their power,
All these could notprocure me any scathe,
So long as I am loyal,true and crimeless.
Wouldst have me rescuethee from this reproach?
Why, yet thy scandal werenot wiped away
But I in danger for thebreach of law.
Thy greatest help isquiet, gentle Nell:
I pray thee, sort thyheart to patience;
These few days' wonderwill be quickly worn.
I summon your grace to hismajesty's parliament,
Holden at Bury the firstof this next month.
And my consent ne'er ask'dherein before!
This is close dealing.Well, I will be there.
My Nell, I take my leave:and, master sheriff,
Let not her penance exceedthe king's commission.
An't please your grace,here my commission stays,
And Sir John Stanley isappointed now
To take her with him tothe Isle of Man.
Must you, Sir John,protect my lady here?
So am I given in charge,may't please your grace.
Entreat her not the worse inthat I pray you use her well:
the world may laugh again;
And I may live to do youkindness if you do it her:
and so, Sir John, farewell!
What, gone, my lord, andbid me not farewell!
Witness my tears, I cannotstay to speak.
Art thou gone too? allcomfort go with thee!
For none abides with me:my joy is death;
Death, at whose name I ofthave been afear'd,
Because I wish'd thisworld's eternity.
Stanley, I prithee, go,and take me hence;
I care not whither, for Ibeg no favour,
Only convey me where thouart commanded.
Sheriff, farewell, andbetter than I fare,
Although thou hast beenconduct of my shame.
It is my office; and,madam, pardon me.
Ay, ay, farewell; thyoffice is discharged.
Come, Stanley, shall wego?
Madam, your penance done,throw off this sheet,
And go we to attire youfor our journey.
My shame will not beshifted with my sheet:
No, it will hang upon myrichest robes
And show itself, attire mehow I can.
Go, lead the way; I longto see my prison.
I muse my Lord ofGloucester is not come:
'Tis not his wont to bethe hindmost man,
Whate'er occasion keepshim from us now.
Can you not see? or willye not observe
The strangeness of hisalter'd countenance?
With what a majesty heholds himself,
How insolent of late he isbecome,
How proud, how peremptory,and unlike himself?
We know the time since hewas mild and affable,
And if we did but glance afar-off look,
Immediately he was uponhis knee,
That all the court admiredhim for submission:
But meet him now, and, beit in the morn,
When every one will givethe time of day,
He knits his brow andshows an angry eye,
And passeth by with stiffunbowed knee,
Disdaining duty that to usbelongs.
Small curs are notregarded when they grin;
But great men tremble whenthe lion roars;
And Humphrey is no littleman in England.
First note that he is nearyou in descent,
And should you fall, he asthe next will mount.
Me seemeth then it is nopolicy,
Respecting what arancorous mind he bears
And his advantagefollowing your decease,
That he should come aboutyour royal person
Or be admitted to yourhighness' council.
By flattery hath he wonthe commons' hearts,
And when he please to makecommotion,
'Tis to be fear'd they allwill follow him.
Now 'tis the spring, andweeds are shallow-rooted;
Suffer them now, andthey'll o'ergrow the garden
And choke the herbs forwant of husbandry.
The reverent care I bearunto my lord
Made me collect thesedangers in the duke.
If it be fond, call it awoman's fear;
Which fear if betterreasons can supplant,
I will subscribe and say Iwrong'd the duke.
My Lord of Suffolk,Buckingham, and York,
Reprove my allegation, ifyou can;
Or else conclude my wordseffectual.
Well hath your highnessseen into this duke;
And, had I first been putto speak my mind,
I think I should have toldyour grace's tale.
The duchess, by hissubornation,
Upon my life, began herdevilish practises:
Smooth runs the waterwhere the brook is deep;
And in his simple show heharbours treason.
The fox barks not when hewould steal the lamb.
No, no, my sovereign;Gloucester is a man
Unsounded yet and full ofdeep deceit.
Did he not, contrary toform of law,
Devise strange deaths forsmall offences done?
And did he not, in hisprotectorship,
Levy great sums of moneythrough the realm
For soldiers' pay inFrance, and never sent it?
By means whereof the townseach day revolted.
Tut, these are pettyfaults to faults unknown.
Which time will bring tolight in smooth
Duke Humphrey.
My lords, at once: thecare you have of us,
To mow down thorns thatwould annoy our foot,
Is worthy praise: but, shallI speak my conscience,
Our kinsman Gloucester isas innocent
From meaning treason toour royal person
As is the sucking lamb orharmless dove:
The duke is virtuous, mildand too well given
To dream on evil or towork my downfall.
Ah, what's more dangerousthan this fond affiance!
Seems he a dove? hisfeathers are but borrowed,
For he's disposed as thehateful raven:
Is he a lamb? his skin issurely lent him,
For he's inclined as isthe ravenous wolves.
Take heed, my lord; thewelfare of us all
Hangs on the cutting shortthat fraudful man.
All health unto mygracious sovereign!
Welcome, Lord Somerset.What news from France?
That all your interest inthose territories
Is utterly bereft you; allis lost.
Cold news, Lord Somerset:but God's will be done!
Cold news for me; for Ihad hope of France
As firmly as I hope forfertile England.
Thus are my blossomsblasted in the bud
And caterpillars eat myleaves away;
But I will remedy thisgear ere long,
Or sell my title for aglorious grave.
All happiness unto my lordthe king!
Pardon, my liege, that Ihave stay'd so long.
Nay, Gloucester, know thatthou art come too soon,
Unless thou wert moreloyal than thou art:
I do arrest thee of hightreason here.
Well, Suffolk's Duke, thou shaltnot see me blush
Nor change my countenancefor this arrest:
The purest spring is notso free from mud
As I am clear from treasonto my sovereign:
Who can accuse me? whereinam I guilty?
'Tis thought, my lord, thatyou took bribes of France,
And, being protector,stayed the soldiers' pay;
By means whereof hishighness hath lost France.
Is it but thought so? whatare they that think it?
I never robb'd thesoldiers of their pay,
Nor ever had one pennybribe from France.
No; many a pound of mineown proper store,
Because I would not taxthe needy commons,
Have I disbursed to thegarrisons,
And never ask'd forrestitution.
It serves you well, mylord, to say so much.
I say no more than truth,so help me God!
In your protectorship youdid devise
Strange tortures foroffenders never heard of,
That England was defamedby tyranny.
Why, 'tis well known that,whiles I was protector,
Pity was all the faultthat was in me;
For I should melt at anoffender's tears,
And lowly words wereransom for their fault.
My lord, these faults areeasy, quickly answered:
But mightier crimes arelaid unto your charge,
Whereof you cannot easilypurge yourself.
I do arrest you in hishighness' name;
And here commit you to mylord cardinal
To keep, until yourfurther time of trial.
My lord of Gloucester,'tis my special hope
That you will clearyourself from all suspense:
My conscience tells me youare innocent.
Ah, gracious lord, thesedays are dangerous:
Virtue is choked with foulambition
And charity chased henceby rancour's hand;
Foul subornation ispredominant
And equity exiled yourhighness' land.
I know their complot is tohave my life,
And if my death might makethis island happy,
And prove the period oftheir tyranny,
I would expend it with allwillingness:
But mine is made theprologue to their play;
For thousands more, thatyet suspect no peril,
Will not conclude theirplotted tragedy.
Beaufort's red sparkling eyesblab his heart's malice,
And Suffolk's cloudy browhis stormy hate;
Sharp Buckinghamunburthens with his tongue
The envious load that liesupon his heart;
And dogged York, thatreaches at the moon,
Whose overweening arm Ihave pluck'd back,
By false accuse doth levelat my life:
And you, my sovereignlady, with the rest,
Causeless have laiddisgraces on my head,
And with your bestendeavour have stirr'd up
My liefest liege to bemine enemy:
Ay, all you have laid yourheads together--
Myself had notice of yourconventicles--
And all to make away myguiltless life.
I shall not want falsewitness to accuse me,
Nor store of treasons toaugment my guilt;
The ancient proverb willbe well effected:
'A staff is quickly foundto beat a dog.'
My liege, his raging isintolerable:
He'll wrest the sense andhold us here all day:
Lord cardinal, he is yourprisoner.
Sirs, take away the duke,and guard him sure.
Ah! thus King Henry throwsaway his crutch
Before his legs be firm tobear his body.
Thus is the shepherdbeaten from thy side,
And wolves are gnarlingwho shall gnaw thee first.
Ah, that my fear werefalse! ah, that it were!
For, good King Henry, thydecay I fear.
My lords, what to yourwisdoms seemeth best,
Do or undo, as if ourselfwere here.
What, will your highnessleave the parliament?
Ay, Margaret; my heart isdrown'd with grief,
Whose flood begins to flowwithin mine eyes,
My body round engirt withmisery,
For what's more miserablethan discontent?
Ah, uncle Humphrey! in thyface I see
The map of honour, truthand loyalty:
What louring star nowenvies thy estate,
That these great lords andMargaret our queen
Do seek subversion of thyharmless life?
Thou never didst themwrong, nor no man wrong;
And as the butcher takesaway the calf
And binds the wretch, andbeats it when it strays,
Bearing it to the bloodyslaughter-house,
Even so remorseless havethey borne him hence;
And as the dam runs lowingup and down,
Looking the way herharmless young one went,
And can do nought but wailher darling's loss,
Even so myself bewailsgood Gloucester's case
With sad unhelpful tears,and with dimm'd eyes
Look after him and cannotdo him good,
So mighty are his vowedenemies.
His fortunes I will weep;and, 'twixt each groan
Say 'Who's a traitor?Gloucester he is none.'
Free lords, cold snow meltswith the sun's hot beams.
Henry my lord is cold ingreat affairs,
Too full of foolish pity,and Gloucester's show
Beguiles him as themournful crocodile
With sorrow snaresrelenting passengers,
Believe me, lords, werenone more wise than I--
And yet herein I judgemine own wit good--
This Gloucester should bequickly rid the world,
To rid us of the fear wehave of him.
That he should die isworthy policy;
But yet we want a colourfor his death:
'Tis meet he be condemn'dby course of law.
But, in my mind, that wereno policy:
The king will labour stillto save his life,
The commons haply rise, tosave his life;
And yet we have buttrivial argument,
More than mistrust, thatshows him worthy death.
So that, by this, youwould not have him die.
Ah, York, no man alive sofain as I!
'Tis York that hath morereason for his death.
But, my lord cardinal, andyou, my Lord of Suffolk,
Say as you think, andspeak it from your souls,
Were't not all one, anempty eagle were set
To guard the chicken froma kite,
As place Duke Humphrey forthe king's protector?
So the poor chicken shouldbe sure of death.
Madam, 'tis true; andwere't not madness, then,
To make the fox surveyorof the fold?
No; let him die, in thathe is a fox,
By nature proved an enemyto the flock,
And do not stand onquillets how to slay him:
Be it by gins, by snares,by subtlety,
Sleeping or waking, 'tisno matter how,
So he be dead; for that isgood deceit
Which mates him first thatfirst intends deceit.
Thrice-noble Suffolk, 'tisresolutely spoke.
Not resolute, except somuch were done;
For things are often spokeand seldom meant:
But that my heartaccordeth with my tongue,
Seeing the deed ismeritorious,
And to preserve mysovereign from his foe,
Say but the word, and Iwill be his priest.
But I would have him dead,my Lord of Suffolk,
Ere you can take dueorders for a priest:
Say you consent andcensure well the deed,
And I'll provide hisexecutioner,
I tender so the safety ofmy liege.
Here is my hand, the deedis worthy doing.
And so say I.
And I and now we threehave spoke it,
It skills not greatly whoimpugns our doom.
From Irelandam I come amain,
To signify that rebelsthere are up
And put the Englishmenunto the sword:
Send succors, lords, andstop the rage betime,
Before the wound do growuncurable;
For, being green, there isgreat hope of help.
A breach that craves aquick expedient stop!
What counsel give you inthis weighty cause?
That Somerset be sent asregent thither:
'Tis meet that lucky rulerbe employ'd;
Witness the fortune hehath had in France.
If York, with all hisfar-fet policy,
Had been the regent thereinstead of me,
He never would have stay'din France so long.
No, not to lose it all, asthou hast done:
I rather would have lostmy life betimes
Than bring a burthen ofdishonour home
By staying there so longtill all were lost.
Show me one scarcharacter'd on thy skin:
Men's flesh preserved sowhole do seldom win.
Nay, then, this spark willprove a raging fire,
If wind and fuel bebrought to feed it with:
No more, good York; sweetSomerset, be still:
Thy fortune, York, hadstthou been regent there,
Might happily have provedfar worse than his.
What, worse than nought?nay, then, a shame take all!
And, in the number, theethat wishest shame!
My Lord of York, try whatyour fortune is.
The uncivil kerns ofIreland are in arms
And temper clay with bloodof Englishmen:
To Ireland will you lead aband of men,
Collected choicely, fromeach county some,
And try your hap againstthe Irishmen?
I will, my lord, so pleasehis majesty.
Why, our authority is hisconsent,
And what we do establishhe confirms:
Then, noble York, takethou this task in hand.
I am content: provide mesoldiers, lords,
Whiles I take order formine own affairs.
A charge, Lord York, thatI will see perform'd.
But now return we to thefalse Duke Humphrey.
No more of him; for I willdeal with him
That henceforth he shalltrouble us no more.
And so break off; the dayis almost spent:
Lord, you and Imust talk of that event.
My Lord of Suffolk, withinfourteen days
At Bristol I expect mysoldiers;
For there I'll ship themall for Ireland.
I'll see it truly done, myLord of York.
Now, York, or never, steelthy fearful thoughts,
And change misdoubt intoresolution:
Be that thou hopest to be, orwhat thou art resign to death;
it is not worth the enjoying:
Let pale-faced fear keepwith the mean-born man,
And find no harbour in aroyal heart.
Faster than spring-time showerscomes thought on thought,
And not a thought butthinks on dignity.
My brain more busy thanthe labouring spider
Weaves tedious snares totrap mine enemies.
Well, nobles, well, 'tispoliticly done,
To send me packing with anhost of men:
I fear me you but warm thestarved snake,
Who, cherish'd in your breasts,will sting your hearts.
'Twas men I lack'd and youwill give them me:
I take it kindly; and yetbe well assured
You put sharp weapons in amadman's hands.
Whiles I in Irelandnourish a mighty band,
I will stir up in Englandsome black storm
Shall blow ten thousandsouls to heaven or hell;
And this fell tempestshall not cease to rage
Until the golden circuiton my head,
Like to the glorious sun'stransparent beams,
Do calm the fury of thismad-bred flaw.
And, for a minister of myintent,
I have seduced aheadstrong Kentishman,
John Cade of Ashford,
To make commotion, as fullwell he can,
Under the title of JohnMortimer.
That devil here shall bemy substitute;
For that John Mortimer,which now is dead,
In face, in gait, inspeech, he doth resemble:
By this I shall perceivethe commons' mind,
How they affect the houseand claim of York.
Say that he be taken, rack'dand tortured,
I know no pain they caninflict upon him
Will make him say I movedhim to these arms.
Say that he thrive, as'tis great like he will,
Why, then from Irelandcome I with my strength
And reap the harvest whichthat rascal sow'd;
For Humphrey being dead,as he shall be,
And Henry put apart, thenext for me.
Run to my Lord of Suffolk;let him know
We have dispatch'd theduke, as he commanded.
O that it were to do! Whathave we done?
Didst ever hear a man sopenitent?
Here comes my lord.
Now, sirs, have youdispatch'd this thing?
Ay, my good lord, he'sdead.
Why, that's well said. Go,get you to my house;
I will reward you for thisventurous deed.
The king and all the peersare here at hand.
Have you laid fair thebed? Is all things well,
According as I gavedirections?
'Tis handsome, my lord.
Away! be gone.
(trumpets playing)
Go, call our uncle to ourpresence straight;
Say we intend to try hisgrace to-day.
If he be guilty, as 'tispublished.
I'll call him presently,my noble lord.
Lords, take your places;and, I pray you all,
Proceed no straiter 'gainstour uncle Gloucester
Than from true evidence ofgood esteem
He be approved in practiseculpable.
God forbid any maliceshould prevail,
That faultless may condemna nobleman!
Pray God he may acquit himof suspicion!
I thank thee, Meg; thesewords content me much.
How now! why look'st thoupale? why tremblest thou?
Where is our uncle? what'sthe matter, Suffolk?
Dead in his bed, my lord;Gloucester is dead.
Marry, God forfend!
God's secret judgment: Idid dream to-night
The duke was dumb andcould not speak a word.
How fares my lord? Help,lords! the king is dead.
Rear up his body; wringhim by the nose.
Go, run, help, help! OHenry, ope thine eyes!
He doth revive again:madam, be patient.
O heavenly God!
How fares my gracious lord?
Comfort, my sovereign!gracious Henry, comfort!
What, doth my Lord ofSuffolk comfort me?
Came he right now to singa raven's note,
Whose dismal tune bereftmy vital powers;
And thinks he that thechirping of a wren,
By crying comfort from ahollow breast,
Can chase away thefirst-conceived sound?
Hide not thy poison withsuch sugar'd words;
Lay not thy hands on me;forbear, I say;
Their touch affrights meas a serpent's sting.
Thou baleful messenger,out of my sight!
Look not upon me, forthine eyes are wounding:
Yet do not go: come,basilisk,
And kill the innocentgazer with thy sight;
For in the shade of deathI shall find joy;
In life but double death,now Gloucester's dead.
Why do you rate my Lord ofSuffolk thus?
Although the duke wasenemy to him,
Yet he most Christian-likelaments his death:
And for myself, foe as hewas to me,
Might liquid tears orheart-offending groans
Or blood-consuming sighsrecall his life,
I would be blind withweeping, sick with groans,
Look pale as primrose withblood-drinking sighs,
And all to have the nobleduke alive.
What know I how the worldmay deem of me?
For it is known we werebut hollow friends:
It may be judged I madethe duke away;
So shall my name withslander's tongue be wounded,
And princes' courts befill'd with my reproach.
This get I by his death:ay me, unhappy!
To be a queen, and crown'dwith infamy!
Ah, woe is me forGloucester, wretched man!
Be woe for me, morewretched than he is.
What, dost thou turn awayand hide thy face?
I am no loathsome leper;look on me.
What! art thou, like theadder, waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too and killthy forlorn queen.
Is all thy comfort shut inGloucester's tomb?
Why, then, dame Margaretwas ne'er thy joy.
Erect his statue andworship it,
And make my image but analehouse sign.
Was I for this nighwreck'd upon the sea
And twice by awkward windfrom England's bank
Drove back again unto mynative clime?
What boded this, but wellforewarning wind
Did seem to say 'Seek nota scorpion's nest,
Nor set no footing on thisunkind shore'?
What did I then, butcursed the gentle gusts
And he that loosed themforth their brazen caves:
And bid them blow towardsEngland's blessed shore,
Or turn our stern upon adreadful rock
Yet AEolus would not be amurderer,
But left that hatefuloffice unto thee:
The pretty-vaulting searefused to drown me,
Knowing that thou wouldsthave me drown'd on shore,
With tears as salt as sea,through thy unkindness:
The splitting rocks cower'din the sinking sands
And would not dash me withtheir ragged sides,
Because thy flinty heart,more hard than they,
Might in thy palace perishMargaret.
As far as I could ken thychalky shores,
When from thy shore thetempest beat us back,
I stood upon the hatchesin the storm,
And when the dusky skybegan to rob
My earnest-gaping sight ofthy land's view,
I took a costly jewel frommy neck,
A heart it was, bound inwith diamonds,
And threw it towards thyshore: the sea received it,
And so I wish'd thy bodymight my heart:
And even with this I lostfair England's view
And bid mine eyes bepacking with my heart
And call'd them blind anddusky spectacles,
For losing ken of Albion'swished coast.
How often have I temptedSuffolk's tongue,
The agent of thy foulinconstancy,
To sit and witch me, asAscanius did
When he to madding Didowould unfold
His father's actscommenced in burning Troy!
Am I not witch'd like her?or thou not false like him?
Ay me, I can no more! die,Margaret!
For Henry weeps that thoudost live so long.
(angry crowd makes noiseoutside)
It is reported, mightysovereign,
That good Duke Humphreytraitorously is murder'd
By Suffolk and theCardinal Beaufort's means.
(crowd) Ay!
The commons, like an angryhive of bees
That want their leader,scatter up and down
And care not who theysting in his revenge.
Myself have calm'd theirspleenful mutiny,
Until they hear the orderof his death.
That he is dead, goodWarwick, 'tis too true;
But how he died God knows,not Henry:
his chamber, view hisbreathless corpse,
And comment then upon hissudden death.
That shall I do, my liege.Stay, Salisbury,
With the rude multitudetill I return.
O Thou that judgest allthings, stay my thoughts,
My thoughts, that labourto persuade my soul
Some violent hands werelaid on Humphrey's life!
If my suspect be false,forgive me God,
For judgment only dothbelong to thee.
Come hither, gracioussovereign, view this body.
That is to see how deep mygrave is made;
For with his soul fled allmy worldly solace,
For seeing him I see mylife in death.
As surely as my soul intendsto live with that dread King
that took our state upon him
To free us from hisfather's wrathful curse,
I do believe that violenthands were laid
Upon the life of thisthrice-famed duke.
A dreadful oath, swornwith a solemn tongue!
What instance gives LordWarwick for his vow?
See how his face is black andfull of blood.
His eye-balls further outthan when he lived,
Staring full ghastly likea strangled man;
His hair uprear'd, his nostrilsstretched with struggling;
His hands abroad display'd,as one that grasp'd
And tugg'd for life andwas by strength subdued:
Look, on the sheets hishair you see, is sticking;
His well-proportion'd beardmade rough and rugged,
Like to the summer's cornby tempest lodged.
It cannot be but he wasmurder'd here;
The least of all thesesigns were probable.
Why, Warwick, who shoulddo the duke to death?
Myself and Beaufort hadhim in protection;
And we, I hope, sir, areno murderers.
But both of you were vow'dDuke Humphrey's foes,
And you, forsooth, had thegood duke to keep:
'Tis like you would notfeast him like a friend;
And 'tis well seen hefound an enemy.
Then you, belike, suspectthese noblemen
As guilty of DukeHumphrey's timeless death.
Who finds the heifer deadand bleeding fresh
And sees fast by a butcherwith an axe,
But will suspect 'twas hethat made the slaughter?
Who finds the partridge inthe puttock's nest,
But may imagine how thebird was dead,
Although the kite soarwith unbloodied beak?
Are you the butcher,Suffolk? Where's your knife?
Is Beaufort term'd a kite?Where are his talons?
I wear no knife toslaughter sleeping men;
But here's a vengefulsword, rusted with ease,
That shall be scoured inhis rancorous heart
That slanders me withmurder's crimson badge.
Say, if thou darest, proudLord of Warwick-shire,
That I am faulty in DukeHumphrey's death.
What dares not Warwick, iffalse Suffolk dare him?
He dares not calm hiscontumelious spirit
Nor cease to be anarrogant controller,
Though Suffolk dare himtwenty thousand times.
Madam, be still; withreverence may I say;
For every word you speakin his behalf
Is slander to your royaldignity.
Blunt-witted lord, ignoblein demeanor!
If ever lady wrong'd herlord so much,
Thy mother took into herblameful bed
Some stern untutor'dchurl, and noble stock
Was graft with crab-treeslip; whose fruit thou art,
And never of the Nevils'noble race.
But that the guilt ofmurder bucklers thee
And I should rob thedeathsman of his fee,
Quitting thee thereby often thousand shames,
And that my sovereign'spresence makes me mild,
I would, false murderouscoward, on thy knee
Make thee beg pardon forthy passed speech,
And say it was thy motherthat thou meant'st
That thou thyself was bornin bastardy;
And after all this fearfulhomage done,
Give thee thy hire andsend thy soul to hell,
Pernicious blood-sucker ofsleeping men!
Thou shall be waking wellI shed thy blood,
If from this presence thoudarest go with me.
Away even now, or I willdrag thee hence:
Unworthy though thou art,I'll cope with thee
And do some service toDuke Humphrey's ghost.
What stronger breastplatethan a heart untainted!
Thrice is he armed thathath his quarrel just,
And he but naked, thoughlock'd up in steel
Whose conscience withinjustice is corrupted.
(crowd makes noise inbackground)
What noise is this?
Why, how now, lords!
Your wrathful weapons drawnHere in our presence!
Dare you be so bold?
The traitorous Warwickwith the men of Bury
Set all upon me, mightysovereign.
[To the Commons, entering]Sirs, stand apart;
The king shall know yourmind.
Dread lord, the commonssend you word by me,
Unless false Suffolkstraight be done to death,
Or banished fair England'sterritories,
They will by violence tearhim from your palace
And torture him withgrievous lingering death.
They say, by him the goodDuke Humphrey died;
They say, in him they fearyour highness' death;
And mere instinct of loveand loyalty,
Makes them thus forward inhis banishment.
They say, in care of yourmost royal person,
That if your highnessshould intend to sleep
And charge that no manshould disturb your rest
In pain of your dislike orpain of death,
Yet, notwithstanding sucha strait edict,
Were there a serpent seen,with forked tongue,
That slily glided towardsyour majesty,
It were but necessary youwere waked,
And therefore do they cry,though you forbid,
That they will guard you,whether you will or no,
From such fell serpents asfalse Suffolk is,
With whose envenomed andfatal sting,
Your loving uncle, twentytimes his worth,
They say, is shamefullybereft of life.
(crowd chants) An answer fromthe king, my Lord of Salisbury!
'Tis like the commons,rude unpolish'd hinds,
Could send such message totheir sovereign:
But you, my lord, wereglad to be employ'd,
To show how quaint anorator you are:
But all the honourSalisbury hath won
Is that he was the lordambassador
Sent from a sort oftinkers to the king.
(crowd chants) Ananswer from the king,
or we will all break in!
Go, Salisbury, and tellthem all from me.
I thank them for theirtender loving care;
And had I not been citedso by them,
Yet did I purpose as theydo entreat;
For, sure, my thoughts dohourly prophesy
Mischance unto my state bySuffolk's means:
And therefore, by Hismajesty I swear,
Whose far unworthy deputyI am,
He shall not breatheinfection in this air
But three days longer, onthe pain of death.
O Henry, let me plead forgentle Suffolk!
Ungentle queen, to callhim gentle Suffolk!
No more, I say: if thoudost plead for him,
Thou wilt but add increaseunto my wrath.
Had I but said, I wouldhave kept my word,
But when I swear, it isirrevocable.
If, after three days' space,thou here be'st found
On any ground that I amruler of,
The world shall not beransom for thy life.
Come, Warwick, come, goodWarwick, go with me;
I have great matters toimpart to thee.
Mischance and sorrow goalong with thee!
Heart's discontent andsour affliction
Be playfellows to keep youcompany!
There's two of you; thedevil make a third!
And threefold vengeancetend upon your steps!
Cease, gentle queen, theseexecrations,
And let thy Suffolk takehis heavy leave.
Fie, coward woman andsoft-hearted wretch!
Hast thou not spirit tocurse thine enemy?
A plague upon them! whereforeshould I curse them?
Would curses kill, as doththe mandrake's groan,
I would invent asbitter-searching terms,
As curst, as harsh andhorrible to hear,
Deliver'd strongly throughmy fixed teeth,
With full as many signs ofdeadly hate,
As lean-faced Envy in herloathsome cave:
My tongue should stumblein mine earnest words;
Mine eyes should sparklelike the beaten flint;
Mine hair be fixed on end,as one distract;
Ay, every joint shouldseem to curse and ban:
And even now my burthen'dheart would break,
Should I not curse them.Poison be their drink!
Gall, worse than gall, thedaintiest that they taste!
Their softest shade agrove of cypress trees!
Their chiefest prospectmurdering basilisks!
Their softest touch assmart as lizards' sting!
Their music frightful asthe serpent's hiss,
And boding screech-owlsmake the concert full!
All the foul terrors indark-seated hell--
Enough, sweet Suffolk;thou torment'st thyself;
And these dread curses, likethe sun 'gainst glass,
Or like an overchargedgun, recoil,
And turn the force of themupon thyself.
You bade me ban, and willyou bid me leave?
Ay entreat theecease. O give me thy hand,
That I may dew it with mymournful tears;
O, could this kiss beprinted in thy hand,
That thou mightst thinkupon these by the seal,
Through whom a thousandsighs are breathed for thee!
So, get thee gone, that Imay know my grief;
'Tis but surmised whilesthou art standing by,
I will repeal thee, or, bewell assured,
Adventure to be banishedmyself:
And banished I am, if butfrom thee.
No; speak not to me; evennow be gone.
No. O' go not yet!
And yet farewell; andfarewell life with thee!
Thus is poor Suffolk tentimes banished;
Once by the king, and threetimes thrice by thee.
'Tis not the land I carefor, wert thou thence;
A wilderness is populousenough,
So Suffolk had thyheavenly company:
For where thou art, thereis the world itself,
With every severalpleasure in the world,
And where thou art not,desolation.
I can no more: live thouto joy thy life;
Myself no joy in noughtbut that thou livest.
Wither goes Vaux so fast?what news, I prithee?
To signify unto hismajesty
That Cardinal Beaufort isat point of death;
For suddenly a grievoussickness took him,
That makes him gasp andstare and grasp the air,
Blaspheming God andcursing men on earth.
Sometimes he talks as ifDuke Humphrey's ghost
Were by his side; sometimehe calls the king,
And whispers to hispillow, as to him,
The secrets of hisovercharged soul;
And I am sent to tell hismajesty
That even now he criesaloud for him.
Go tell this heavy messageto the king.
Ay me! what is this world!what news are these!
Now get thee hence: the king,thou know'st, is coming;
If thou be found by me,thou art but dead.
If I depart from thee, Icannot live;
And in thy sight to die,what were it else
But like a pleasantslumber in thy lap?
Here could I breathe mysoul into the air,
As mild and gentle as thecradle-babe
Dying with mother's dugbetween its lips:
To die by thee were but todie in jest;
From thee to die weretorture more than death:
O, let me stay, befallwhat may befall!
Away! though parting be afretful corrosive,
It is applied to adeathful wound.
To France, sweet Suffolk:let me hear from thee;
For wheresoe'er thou artin this world's globe,
I'll have an Iris thatshall find thee out. Away!
I go.
And take my heart withthee.
A jewel, lock'd into thewofull'st cask
That ever did contain athing of worth.
Even as a splitted bark,so sunder we
This way fall I to death.
This way for me.
(horns sounding)
How fares my lord? speak,Beaufort, to thy sovereign.
If thou be'st death, I'll givethee England's treasure,
Enough to purchase suchanother island,
So thou wilt let me live,and feel no pain.
Ah, what a sign it is ofevil life,
Where death's approach isseen so terrible!
Beaufort, it is thysovereign speaks to thee.
Bring me unto my trialwhen thou will.
Died he not in his bed?where should he die?
Can I make men live,whether they will or not?
O, torture me no more! Iwill confess.
Alive again? then show mewhere he is:
I'll give a thousand poundto look upon him.
He hath no eyes, the dusthath blinded them.
Comb down his hair; look,look! it stands upright,
Like lime-twigs set tocatch my winged soul.
Give me some drink; andbid the apothecary
Bring the strong poisonthat I bought of him.
O thou eternal Mover ofthe heavens.
Look with a gentle eyeupon this wretch!
O, beat away the busymeddling fiend
That lays strong siegeunto this wretch's soul.
And from his bosom purgethis black despair!
See, how the pangs ofdeath do make him grin!
Disturb him not; let himpass peaceably.
Peace to his soul, ifGod's good pleasure be!
Lord cardinal, if thouthink'st on heaven's bliss,
Hold up thy hand, makesignal of thy hope.
He dies, and makes nosign. O God, forgive him!
So bad a death argues amonstrous life.
Forbear to judge, for weare sinners all.
Close up his eyes and drawthe curtain close;
And let us all tomeditation.
The gaudy, blabbing andremorseful day
Is crept into the bosom ofthe sea;
And now loud-howlingwolves arouse the jades
That drag the tragicmelancholy night;
Who, with their drowsy,slow and flagging wings,
Clip dead men's graves andfrom their misty jaws
Breathe foul contagiousdarkness in the air.
Therefore bring forth thesoldiers of our prize;
For, whilst our pinnaceanchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make theirransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stainthis discolour'd shore.
Master, this prisonerfreely give I thee;
And thou that art hismate, make boot of this;
The other, WalterWhitmore, is thy share.
What is my ransom, master?Let me know.
A thousand crowns, or elselay down your head.
(Master's-Mate)And so much shallyou give, or off goes yours.
What, think you much topay two thousand crowns,
And bear the name and portof gentlemen?
Cut both the villains'throats; for die you shall:
The lives of those whichwe have lost in fight
Be counterpoised with sucha petty sum!
I'll give it, sir; andtherefore spare my life.
And so will I and writehome for it straight.
I lost mine eye in layingthe prize aboard,
And therefore to revengeit, shalt thou die;
And so should these, if Imight have my will.
Be not so rash; takeransom, let him live.
Look on my George; I am agentleman:
Rate me at what thou wilt,thou shalt be paid.
And so am I; my name isWalter Whitmore.
How now! why start'st thou?what, doth death affright?
Thy name affrights me, inwhose sound is death.
A cunning man didcalculate my birth
And told me that by waterI should die:
Yet let not this make theebe bloody-minded;
Never yet did basedishonour blur our name,
But with our sword wewiped away the blot;
Therefore, when merchant-likeI sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my armstorn and defaced,
And I proclaim'd a cowardthrough the world!
Stay, Whitmore; for thyprisoner is a prince,
The Duke of Suffolk,William de la Pole.
The Duke of Suffolkmuffled up in rags!
Ay, but these rags are nopart of the duke:
Jove sometimes wentdisguised, and why not I?
But Jove was never slain,as thou shalt be.
Obscure and lowly swain,King Henry's blood,
The honourable blood ofLancaster,
Must not be shed by such ajaded groom.
Hast thou not kiss'd thyhand and held my stirrup?
Bare-headed plodded by myfoot-cloth mule
And thought thee happywhen I shook my head?
How often hast thou waitedat my cup,
Fed from my trencher,kneel'd down at the board.
When I have feasted withQueen Margaret?
Remember it and let itmake thee crest-fall'n,
Ay, and allay this thyabortive pride;
Speak, captain, shall Istab the forlorn swain?
First let my words stabhim, as he hath me.
Base slave, thy words areblunt and so art thou.
Convey him hence and onour longboat's side
Strike off his head.
Thou darest not, for thyown.
Pole!
Ay, kennel, puddle, sink;
whose filth Troubles the silverspring where England drinks.
Now will I dam up this thyyawning mouth
For swallowing thetreasure of the realm:
Thy lips that kiss'd thequeen shall sweep the ground;
And thou that smiledst atgood Duke Humphrey's death,
Against the senselesswinds shalt grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hissat thee again:
And wedded be thou to thehags of hell,
For daring to affy amighty lord
Unto the daughter of aworthless king,
By thee Anjou and Mainewere sold to France,
The false revoltingNormans thorough thee
Disdain to call us lord,and Picardy
Hath slain their governors,surprised our forts,
And sent the raggedwounded soldiers home.
The princely Warwick, andthe Nevils all,
Whose dreadful swords werenever drawn in vain,
As hating thee, are risingup in arms:
And now the house of York,thrust from the crown
By shameful murder of aguiltless king
Burns with revenging fire;
The commons here in Kentare up in arms:
And, to conclude, reproachand beggary
Is crept into the palaceof our king.
And all by thee. Away!convey him hence.
O that I were a god, toshoot forth thunder
Upon these paltry,servile, abject drudges!
It is impossible that Ishould die
By such a lowly vassal asthyself.
Thy words move rage andnot remorse in me:
Ay but thy deeds shall stay thyfury soon
I go of message from thequeen to France;
I charge thee waft mesafely cross the Channel.
Come, Suffolk, I must waftthee to thy death.
'tis thee I fear.
Thou shalt have cause tofear before I leave thee.
What, are ye daunted now?now will ye stoop?
My gracious lord, entreathim, speak him fair.
Suffolk's imperial tongueis stern and rough,
Used to command, untaughtto plead for favour.
Far be it we should honoursuch as these
With humble suit: no,rather let my head
Stoop to the block thanthese knees bow to any
Save to the God ofheaven and to my king;
And sooner dance upon abloody pole
Than stand uncover'd tothe vulgar groom.
True nobility is exemptfrom fear:
More can I bear than youdare execute.
Hale him away, and let himtalk no more.
Come, soldiers, show whatcruelty ye can,
That this my death maynever be forgot!
Great men oft die by vilebezonians:
A Roman sworder andbanditto slave
Murder'd sweet Tully;Brutus' bastard hand
Stabb'd Julius Caesar;savage islanders
Pompey the Great; andSuffolk...(sound of beheading)
...dies by pirates.
And as for those whoseransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one ofthem depart;
So come you with usand let him go.
There let his head andlifeless body lie,
Until the queen hismistress bury it.
O barbarous and bloodyspectacle!
His body will I bear untothe king:
If he revenge it not, yetwill his friends;
So will the queen, thatliving held him dear.
Come, and get thee a sword,though made of a lath;
they have been up thesetwo days.
They have the more need tosleep now, then.
I tell thee, Jack Cade theclothier means to dress
the commonwealth, and turn it,and set a new nap upon it.
So he had need, for'tis threadbare.
Well, I say it was nevermerry world in England
since gentlemen came up.
O miserable age! virtue is notregarded in handicrafts-men.
The nobility think scornto go in leather aprons.
Nay, more, the king'scouncil are no good workmen.
True; and yet it is said,labour in thy vocation;
which is as much to say as,
let the magistratesbe labouring men;
and therefore shouldwe be magistrates.
Thou hast hit it; forthere's no better sign of a
brave mind than a hardhand.
I see them! I see them!
There's Best's son,tanner of Wingham,--
He shall have theskin of our enemies,
to make dog's-leather of.
And Dick the Butcher,--
Then is sin struckdown like an ox,
and iniquity's throatcut like a calf.
And Smith the weaver,--
Argo, their thread of lifeis spun.
Come, come, let's fall inwith them.
(men chanting) John Cade!!
We John Cade, so termed ofour supposed father,--
Or rather, of stealing acade of herrings.
For our enemies shall fallbefore us, inspired with
the spirit of putting downkings and princes,
--Command silence.
Silence!
My father was aMortimer,--
He was an honest man,and a good bricklayer.
My mother a Plantagenet,--
I knew her well; she wasa midwife.
My wife descended of theLacies,--
She was, indeed, apedler's daughter,
and sold many laces.
Therefore am I of anhonourable house.
Ay, by my faith, thefield is honourable;
and there was he borne,under hedge,
Valiant I am.
A' must needs; forbeggary is valiant.
I am able to endure much.
O no doubt of that; forI have seen him
whipped three market-daystogether.
Be valiant, then; foryour captain is valiant,
and vows reformation.
There shall be in England
seven, eight me loavessold for a penny:
the three-hooped potshall have ten hoops
and I will make it felonyto drink small beer:
all the realm shallbe in common;
and in Cheapside shallmy palfrey go to grass:
and when I am king,as king I will be,--
(crowd chants) God save yourmajesty!
I thank you, good people:there shall be no money;
all shall eat anddrink on my score;
and I will apparel them all inone livery, that they may agree
like brothers andworship me their lord.
The first thing we do is, killall the lawyers.
(crowd) Ay.
Nay, that I mean to do. Isnot this a lamentable thing,
that of the skin of an innocentlamb should be made parchment?
that parchment, beingscribbled o'er,
should undo a man? Somesay the bee stings:
I say, 'tis the bee'swax; for I did but once
seal to a thing, and I wasnever mine own man since.
How now! who's there?
The clerk of Chatham:he can write and read
and cast accompt.
O monstrous!
We took him setting ofboys' copies.
I am sorry for't: the man is aproper man, of mine honour;
unless I find him guilty,he shall not die.
Come hither, sirrah,I must examine thee:
what is thy name?
Emmanuel.
Thus thow use to write thy name,
Alas thou a mark to thyself likean honest plain dealing man
Sir, I thank God, I havebeen so well brought up
that I can write my name.
(crowd) He hath confessed:
Away with him, I say!hang him with his pen
and ink-horn about his neck.
Where's our general?
Here I am, thou particularfellow.
Fly, fly, fly! Sir HumphreyStafford
and his brother are hard by,with the king's forces.
drums of approaching army in background
Stand, villain, stand,or I'll fell thee down.
He shall be encountered witha man as good as himself:
he is but a knight, is a'?
No.
To equal him, I will makemyself a knight presently.
Rise up Sir John Mortimer.
Now have at him!
Horns and drums play
Rebellious hinds, thefilth and scum of Kent,
Mark'd for the gallows,lay your weapons down;
Home to your cottages,forsake this groom:
The king is merciful, ifyou repent.
But angry, wrathful, andinclined to blood,
If you go forward;therefore yield, or die.
As for these silken-coatedslaves, I care not:
It is to you, good people,that I speak,
Over whom, in time tocome, I hope to rule;
For I am rightful heirunto the crown.
Villain, thy father was aplasterer;
And thou thyself ashearman, art thou not?
And Adam was a gardener.
And what of that?
Marry, this: EdmundMortimer, Earl of March.
Married the Duke of Clarence'daughter, did he not?
Ay, sir.
By her he had two childrenat one birth.
That's false.
Ay, there's the question;but I say, 'tis true:
The elder of them, beingput to nurse,
Was by a beggar-womanstolen away;
And, ignorant of his birthand parentage,
Became a bricklayer whenhe came to age:
His son am I; deny it, ifyou can.
Nay, 'tis too true;therefore he shall be king.
Sir, he made a chimneyin my father's house,
and the bricks are alive atthis day to testify it;
therefore deny it not.
And will you credit thisbase drudge's words,
That speaks he knows notwhat?
(crowd) Ay, marry, will we;therefore get ye gone.
Jack Cade, the Duke ofYork hath taught you this.
He lies, for I inventedit myself.
Go to then, tell the kingfrom me, that, for his
father's sake, Henry the Fifth,
I am content he shall reign;
but I'll be protector over him.
And furthermore, wellhave the Lord Say's head
for selling thedukedom of Maine.
And good reason; forthereby is England mained,
and fain to go with a staff, butthat my puissance holds it up.
Fellow kings, I tellyou that that Lord Say
hath gelded the commonwealth,and made it an eunuch:
and more than that,he can speak French;
and therefore he is a traitor.
O gross and miserableignorance!
Nay, answer, if you can:the Frenchmen are our
enemies; go to, then,I ask but this:
can he that speaks withthe tongue of an enemy
be a good counsellor, or no?
(crowd) No, no; and thereforewe'll have his head.
Well, seeing gentle wordswill not prevail,
Assail them with the armyof the king.
Herald, away; andthroughout every town
Proclaim them traitorsthat are up with Cade;
That those which flybefore the battle ends
May, even in their wives'and children's sight,
Be hang'd up for exampleat their doors:
And you that be the king'sfriends, follow me.
And you that love thecommons, follow me.
Now show yourselves men;'tis for liberty.
We will not spare onelord, one gentleman:
Spare none but such as goin clouted shoon;
For they are thriftyhonest men,
and such as would, but thatthey dare not, take our parts.
They are all in order andmarch toward us.
But then are we in order whenwe are most out of order.
Come, march forward.
(crowd chants a battle cry)Cade! Cade! Cade!
Where's Dick, the butcherof Ashford?
Here, sir.
They fell before theelike sheep and oxen,
and thou behavedst thyself
as if thou hadst been inthine own slaughter-house:
therefore thus willI reward thee,
the Lent shall be aslong again as it is;
Eh?
thou shalt have a licence tokill for a hundred lacking one.
I desire no more.
And, to speak truth,thou deservest no less.
This monument of thevictory will I bear;
and the bodies will bedragged at my heels
till I do come to London,where we will have the
mayor's sword borne beforeus.
If we mean to thriveand do good,
break open the gaols andlet out the prisoners.
Fear not that, I warrant thee.
Come, let's marchtowards London.
(crowd chants) John Cade! JohnCade!
Oft have I heard thatgrief softens the mind,
And makes it fearful anddegenerate;
Think therefore on revengeand cease to weep.
But who can cease to weepand look on this?
Here may his head lie onmy throbbing breast:
But where's the body thatI should embrace?
What answer makes your graceto the rebels' supplication?
I'll send some holy bishopto entreat;
For God forbid so manysimple souls
Should perish by thesword! And I myself,
Rather than bloody warshall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cadetheir general:
But stay, I'll read itover once again.
Ah, barbarous villains!hath this lovely face
Ruled, like a wanderingplanet, over me,
And could it not enforcethem to relent,
That were unworthy tobehold the same?
Lord Say, Jack Cade hathsworn to have thy head.
Ay, but I hope yourhighness shall have his.
How, madam!
Still lamenting Suffolk's death?
I fear me, love, if that Ihad been dead,
Thou wouldst not havemourn'd so much for me.
No, my love, I should notmourn, but die for thee.
How now! what news? whycomest thou in such haste?
The rebels are inSouthwark; fly, my lord!
Jack Cade proclaimshimself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke ofClarence' house,
And calls your graceusurper openly
And vows to crown himselfin Westminster.
His army is a raggedmultitude
Of hinds and peasants,rude and merciless:
Sir Humphrey Stafford andh is brother's death
Hath given them heart andcourage to proceed:
All scholars, lawyers,courtiers, gentlemen,
They call false caterpillars,and intend their death.
O graceless men! they knownot what they do.
My gracious lord, returnto Killingworth,
Until a power be raised toput them down.
Ah, were the Duke ofSuffolk now alive,
These Kentish rebels wouldbe soon appeased!
Lord Say, the traitorshate thee;
Therefore away with us toKillingworth.
So might your grace'sperson be in danger.
The sight of me is odiousin their eyes;
And therefore in this citywill I stay
And live alone as secretas I may.
Jack Cade hath gottenLondon bridge:
The citizens fly andforsake their houses:
The rascal people,thirsting after prey,
Join with the traitor, andthey jointly swear
To spoil the city and yourroyal court.
Then linger not, my lord,away, take horse.
Come, Margaret; God, ourhope, will succor us.
My hope is gone, nowSuffolk is deceased.
Farewell, my lord: trustnot the Kentish rebels.
Trust nobody, for fear yoube betray'd.
The trust I have is inmine innocence,
And therefore am I boldand resolute.
Jack Cade!
Now is Mortimer lord ofLondon.
I charge and command that,at the city's cost,
the pissing-conduitrun nothing but
claret wine this firstyear of our reign.
And henceforward itshall be treason
for any that calls meother than Lord Mortimer.
Jack Cade! Jack Cade!
Knock him down there.
If this fellow be wise, he'llnever call ye Jack Cade more:
I think he hath a veryfair warning. My lord,
there's an army gatheredtogether in Smithfield.
Come, then, let's go fightwith them; but first, go
and set London bridge onfire; and, if you can,
burn down the Towertoo. Come, let's away.
So, sirs: now go some andpull down the Savoy;
others to the inns ofcourt; down with them all.
I have a suit unto yourlordship.
Be it a lordship, thou shalthave it for that word.
Only that the laws of Englandmay come out of your mouth.
Mass, 'twill be sore law, then;
for he was thrust in themouth with a spear,
and 'tis not whole yet.
Nay, John, it willbe stinking law
for his breath stinks witheating toasted cheese.
I have thought uponit, it shall be so.
Away, burn all therecords of the realm:
my mouth shall be theparliament of England.
Then we are like to havebiting statutes,
unless his teeth be pulledout.
And henceforward allthings shall be in common.
My lord, a prize, a prize!here's the Lord Say,
which sold the towns inFrance; he that made us pay
one and twenty fifteens, andone shilling to the pound,
the last subsidy.
Well, he shall be beheadedfor it ten times.
thou say, thou serge,nay, thou buckram lord!
now art thou within point-blankof our jurisdiction regal.
What canst thouanswer to my majesty
for giving up of Normandy untoMounsieur kiss my backside,
the dauphin of France?
Be it known unto theeby these presence,
even the presence of LordMortimer, that I am the besom
that must sweep the court clean
of such filth as thou art.Thou hast most traitorously
corrupted the youth of the realmin erecting a grammar school;
and whereas, before,our forefathers
had no other books butthe score and the tally,
thou hast causedprinting to be used,
and contrary to the king,his crown and dignity,
thou hast built a paper-mill.
It will be proved to thy facethat thou hast men about thee
that usually speak ofa noun and a verb,
and such abominable words
as no Christian earcan endure to hear.
Thou hast appointedjustices of peace,
to call poor men before them
about matters they werenot able to answer.
Moreover, thou hast putthem in prison; and because
they could not read,thou hast hanged them;
when, indeed, onlyfor that cause
they have been mostworthy to live.
Thou dost ride in afoot-cloth, dost thou not?
What of that?
Marry, thou oughtest not tolet thy horse wear a cloak,
when honester men than thou goin their hose and doublets.
And work in their shirt; asmyself, for example,
that am a butcher.
You men of Kent,--
What say you of Kent?
Nothing but this; 'tis'bona terra, mala gens.'
Away with him, away withhim! he speaks Latin.
Hear me but speak, andbear me where you will.
Kent, in the CommentariesCaesar writ,
Is term'd the civil'stplace of all this isle:
Sweet is the country,because full of riches;
The people liberal,valiant, active, wealthy;
Which makes me hope youare not void of pity.
I sold not Maine, I lostnot Normandy,
Yet, to recover them,would lose my life.
Justice with favour have Ialways done;
Prayers and tears have movedme, gifts could never.
When have I aught exactedat your hands,
But to maintain the king,the realm and you?
Large gifts have I bestow'don learned clerks,
Because my book preferr'dme to the king,
And seeing ignorance isthe curse of God,
Knowledge the wingwherewith we fly to heaven,
Unless you be possess'dwith devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear tomurder me:
This tongue hath parley'dunto foreign kings
For your behoof,--
Tut, when struck'st thouone blow in the field?
Great men have reachinghands: oft have I struck
Those that I never saw andstruck them dead.
O monstrous coward! what,to come behind folks?
These cheeks are pale forwatching for your good.
Give him a box o' the ear andthat will make 'em red again.
Long sitting to determinepoor men's causes
Hath made me full ofsickness and diseases.
Why dost thou quiver, man?
The palsy, and not fear,provokes me.
Nay, he nods at us,as who should say,
I'll be even with them:
I'll see if his headwill stand steadier
on a pole, or no. Take himaway, and behead him.
Tell me wherein have Ioffended most?
Have I affected wealth orhonour? speak.
Are my chests fill'd upwith extorted gold?
Is my apparel sumptuous tobehold?
Whom have I injured, thatye seek my death?
These hands are free fromguiltless bloodshedding,
This breast from harbouringfoul deceitful thoughts.
O, let me live!
I feel remorse in myselfwith his words;
but I'll bridle it: heshall die, an it be
but for pleading so well forhis life. Away with him!
he has a familiarunder his tongue;
he speaks not o' God's name.
Go, take him away,I say, and strike
off his head presently;and then break into his
son-in-law's house,Sir James Cromer,
and strike off his head,
and bring them bothupon two poles hither.
It shall be done.
Ah, countrymen! if whenyou make your prayers,
God should be so obdurateas yourselves,
How would it fare withyour departed souls?
And therefore yet relent,and save my life.
Away with him! and do as Icommand ye.
The proudest peer in therealm shall not wear
a head on his shoulders,unless he pay me tribute;
there shall not amaid be married,
but she shall pay to me
her maidenhead ere theyhave it: men shall hold of
me in capite; and we chargeand command that their
wives shall be as free as heartcan wish or tongue can tell.
My lord, when shallwe go to Cheapside
to take up commoditiesupon our bills?
Marry, presently.
O, brave!
But is not this braver?Let them kiss one another,
for they loved wellwhen they were alive.
Now part them again, lest theyconsult about the giving up of
some more towns in France.Soldiers, defer the spoil
of the city until night: forwith these borne before us,
instead of maces,will we ride through
the streets, and at everycorner have them kiss. Away!
Up Fish Street! down SaintMagnus' Corner! Kill
and knock down! throw theminto Thames!
(trumpets)
What noise is this I hear?Dare any be so bold
to sound retreat or parley,when I command them kill?
Ay, here they be that dareand will disturb thee:
Know, Cade, we comeambassadors from the king
Unto the commons whom thouhast misled;
And here pronounce freepardon to them all
That will forsake thee andgo home in peace.
What say ye, countrymen?will ye relent,
And yield to mercy whilst'tis offer'd you;
Or let a rebel lead you toyour deaths?
Who loves the king andwill embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap, and say'God save his majesty!'
Who hateth him and honoursnot his father,
Henry the Fifth, that madeall France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at usand pass by.
God save the king! Godsave the king!
What, Buckingham andClifford, are ye so brave?
And you, base peasants,do ye believe him?
will you needs be hanged withyour pardons about your necks?
Hath my sword thereforebroke through London gates,
that you should leave meat the White Hart in
Southwark? I thought yewould never have given out
these arms till you hadrecovered your ancient
freedom: but you are allrecreants and dastards,
and delight to live inslavery to the nobility.
Let them break your backswith burthens, take your
houses over your heads,ravish your wives
and daughters beforeyour faces: as for me,
I will make shift for one;
and so, God's curselight upon you all!
We'll follow Cade, we'llfollow Cade!
Is Cade the son of Henrythe Fifth,
That thus you do exclaimyou'll go with him?
Will he conduct you throughthe heart of France,
And make the meanest ofyou earls and dukes?
Were't not a shame, thatwhilst you live at jar,
The fearful French, whomyou late vanquished,
Should make a start o'erseas and vanquish you?
Methinks already in thiscivil broil
I see them lording it inLondon streets,
Crying 'Villiago!' untoall they meet.
Better ten thousandbase-born Cades miscarry
Than you should stoop untoa Frenchman's mercy.
To France, to France, andget what you have lost;
Spare England, for it isyour native coast;
Henry hath money, you arestrong and manly;
God on our side, doubt notof victory.
A Clifford! a Clifford! we'llfollow the king and Clifford.
Was ever feather solightly blown to and fro
as this multitude? The name ofHenry the Fifth hales them
to an hundred mischiefs, andmakes them leave me desolate.
I see them lay their headstogether to surprise me.
My sword make way for me,for here is no staying.
In despite of thedevils and hell,
have through the verymiddest of you?
What, is he fled? Go some,and follow him;
And he that brings hishead unto the king
Shall have a thousandcrowns for his reward.
Follow me, soldiers: we'lldevise a mean
To reconcile you all untothe king.
Was ever king that joy'dan earthly throne,
And could command no morecontent than I?
No sooner was I crept outof my cradle
But I was made a king, atnine months old.
Was never subject long'dto be a king
As I do long and wish tobe a subject.
Health and glad tidings toyour majesty!
Why, Buckingham, is thetraitor Cade surprised?
Or is he but retired tomake him strong?
He is fled, my lord, andall his powers do yield;
And humbly thus, withhalters on their necks,
Expect your highness' doomof life or death.
Then, heaven, set ope thyeverlasting gates,
To entertain my vows ofthanks and praise!
Soldiers, this day haveyou redeemed your lives,
And show'd how well you loveyour prince and country:
Continue still in this sogood a mind,
And Henry, though he beinfortunate,
Assure yourselves, willnever be unkind:
And so, with thanks andpardon to you all,
I do dismiss you to yourseveral countries.
God save the king! Godsave the king!
Please it your grace to beadvertised
The Duke of York is newlycome from Ireland,
And with a puissant and amighty force
Of gallowglasses and stoutkerns
Is marching hitherward inproud array,
And still proclaimeth, ashe comes along,
His arms are only toremove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whomhe terms a traitor.
Thus stands my state, 'twixtCade and York distress'd.
Like to a ship that,having 'scaped a tempest,
Is straightway calm'd andboarded with a pirate:
But now is Cade drivenback, his men dispersed;
And now is York in arms tosecond him.
I pray thee, Buckingham,go and meet him,
And ask him what's thereason of these arms.
Tell him I'll send DukeEdmund to the Tower;
And, Somerset, we'llcommit thee thither,
Until his army bedismiss'd from him.
I will yield my lord toprison willingly,
Or unto death, to do mycountry good.
In any case, be not toorough in terms;
For he is fierce and cannotbrook hard language.
I will, my lord; and doubtnot so to deal
As all things shallredound unto your good.
Come, wife, let's in, andlearn to govern better;
For yet may England cursemy wretched reign.
Fie on ambition! fie onmyself, that have a sword,
and yet am ready to famish!These five days have I hid me
in these woods anddurst not peep out,
for all the country islaid for me; but now
am I so hungry that if I mighthave a lease of my life
for a thousand years Icould stay no longer.
Wherefore, on a brick wall haveI climbed into this garden,
to see if I can eat grass, orpick a sallet another while,
which is not amiss tocool a man's stomach
this hot weather. And Ithink this word 'sallet'
was born to do me good:for many a time, but for a
sallet, my brainpan had beencleft with a brown bill;
and many a time, whenI have been dry and
bravely marching, it hathserved me instead of a
quart pot to drink in; andnow the word 'sallet'
must serve me to feed on.
Lord, who would liveturmoiled in the court,
And may enjoy such quietwalks as these?
This small inheritance myfather left me
Contenteth me, and worth amonarchy.
I seek not to wax great byothers' waning,
Or gather wealth, I carenot, with what envy:
Sufficeth that I havemaintains my state
And sends the poor wellpleased from my gate.
Here's the lord of the soilcome to seize me for a stray,
for entering hisfee-simple without leave.
Ah, villain, thou wilt betrayme, and get a thousand
crowns of the kingcarrying my head to him:
but I'll make thee eat ironlike an ostrich, and swallow
my sword like a great pin,ere thou and I part.
Why, rude companion,whatsoe'er thou be,
I know thee not; why, then,should I betray thee?
Is't not enough to breakinto my garden,
And, like a thief, to cometo rob my grounds,
Climbing my walls in spiteof me the owner,
But thou wilt brave mewith these saucy terms?
Brave thee! ay, by the bestblood that ever was broached,
and beard thee too.Look on me well:
I have eat no meat thesefive days; yet, come thou
and thy five men, and ifI do not leave you all
as dead as a doornails, I prayGod I may never eat grass more.
Nay, it shall ne'er besaid, while England stands,
That Alexander Iden, anesquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poorfamish'd man.
Oppose thy steadfast-gazingeyes to mine,
See if thou canst outfaceme with thy looks:
Set limb to limb, and thouart far the lesser;
Thy hand is but a fingerto my fist,
Thy leg a stick comparedwith this truncheon;
My foot shall fight withall the strength thou hast;
And if mine arm be heavedin the air,
Thy grave is digg'dalready in the earth.
As for words, whosegreatness answers words,
Let this my sword reportwhat speech forbears.
By my valour, the mostcomplete champion that ever I
heard! Steel, if thou turnthe edge, or cut not out
this burly-boned clownin chines of beef
ere thou sleep in thy sheath,
I beseech God on my knees thou
mayst be turned tohobnails.
O, I am slain!
famine and no otherhath slain me:
let ten thousand devils comeagainst me, and give me
but the ten meals I have lost,and I'll defy them all.
Wither, garden;and be henceforth
a burying-place to all thatdo dwell in this house,
because the unconqueredsoul of Cade is fled.
Is't Cade that I have slain,that monstrous traitor?
Iden, farewell, and beproud of thy victory. Tell
Kent from me, she hath losther best man, and exhort
all the world to be cowards;for I, that never feared any,
am vanquished byfamine, not by valour.
How much thou wrong'st me,heaven be my judge.
Die, damned wretch, thecurse of her that bare thee;
And as I thrust thy bodyin with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrustthy soul to hell.
Hence will I drag theeheadlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill whichshall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy mostungracious head;
Which I will bear intriumph to the king,
Leaving thy trunk forcrows to feed upon.
(trumpets and drums sound)
From Ireland thus comesYork to claim his right,
And pluck the crown fromfeeble Henry's head:
Ring, bells, aloud; burn,bonfires, clear and bright,
To entertain greatEngland's lawful king.
Ah! sancta majestas, whowould not buy thee dear?
Let them obey that knownot how to rule;
This hand was made tohandle naught but gold.
I cannot give due actionto my words,
Except a sword or sceptrebalance it:
A sceptre shall it have,have I a sword,
On which I'll toss theflower-de-luce of France.
Whom have we here?Buckingham, to disturb me?
The king hath sent him,sure: I must dissemble.
York, if thou meanestwell, I greet thee well.
Humphrey of Buckingham, Iaccept thy greeting.
Art thou a messenger, orcome of pleasure?
A messenger from Henry,our dread liege,
To know the reason ofthese arms in peace;
Or why thou, being asubject as I am,
Against thy oath and trueallegiance sworn,
Should raise so great apower without his leave,
Or dare to bring thy forceso near the court.
Scarce can I speak, mycholer is so great:
O, I could hew up rocksand fight with flint,
I am so angry at theseabject terms;
But I must make fairweather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weakand I more strong,--
Buckingham, I prithee,pardon me,
That I have given noanswer all this while;
My mind was troubled withdeep melancholy.
The cause why I havebrought this army hither
Is to remove proudSomerset from the king,
Seditious to his grace andto the state.
That is too muchpresumption on thy part:
But if thy arms be to noother end,
The king hath yielded untothy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is inthe Tower.
Upon thine honour, is heprisoner?
Upon mine honour, he isprisoner.
Then, Buckingham, I dodismiss my powers.
Soldiers, I thank you all;disperse yourselves;
Meet me to-morrow in St.George's field,
You shall have pay andevery thing you wish.
And let my sovereign,virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son,nay, all my sons,
As pledges of my fealtyand love;
I'll send them all aswilling as I live:
Lands, goods, horse,armour, any thing I have,
Is his to use, so Somersetmay die.
York, I commend this kindsubmission:
(horns sound)
In all submission andhumility
York doth present himselfunto your highness.
Then what intends theseforces thou dost bring?
To heave the traitorSomerset from hence,
And fight against thatmonstrous rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to bediscomfited.
If one so rude and of somean disposition
May pass into the presenceof a king,
Lo, I present your grace atraitor's head,
The head of Cade, whom Iin combat slew.
The head of Cade! GreatGod, how just art Thou!
O, let me view his visage,being dead,
That living wrought mesuch exceeding trouble.
Tell me, my friend, artthou the man that slew him?
I was, an't like yourmajesty.
How art thou call'd? andwhat is thy degree?
Alexander Iden, that's myname;
A poor esquire of Kent,that loves his king.
So please it you, my lord,'twere not amiss
He were created knight forhis good service.
Iden, kneel down.
Rise up a knight.
We give thee for reward athousand marks,
And will that thouhenceforth attend on us.
May Iden live to meritsuch a bounty.
And never live but trueunto his liege!
See, Buckingham, Somersetcomes with the queen:
Go, bid her hide himquickly from the duke.
For thousand Yorks heshall not hide his head,
But boldly stand and fronthim to his face.
How now! is Somerset atliberty?
Then, York, unloose thylong-imprison'd thoughts,
And let thy tongue beequal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sightof Somerset?
False king! why hast thoubroken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I canbrook abuse?
King did I call thee? no,thou art not king,
Not fit to govern and rulemultitudes,
Which darest not, no, norcanst not rule a traitor.
That head of thine dothnot become a crown;
Thy hand is made to graspa palmer's staff,
And not to grace an awfulprincely sceptre.
That gold must round engirtthese brows of mine,
Whose smile and frown,like to Achilles' spear,
Is able with the change tokill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold asceptre up
And with the same to actcontrolling laws.
Give place: by heaven,thou shalt rule no more
O'er him whom heavencreated for thy ruler.
O monstrous traitor! Iarrest thee, York,
Of capital treason 'gainstthe king and crown;
Obey, audacious traitor;kneel for grace.
Wouldst have me kneel?first let me ask of these,
If they can brook I bow aknee to man.
Sirrah, call in my sons tobe my bail;
I know, ere they will haveme go to ward,
They'll pawn their swordsfor my enfranchisement.
Call hither Clifford! bidhim come amain,
To say if that the bastardboys of York
Shall be the surety fortheir traitor father.
O blood-besottedNeapolitan,
Outcast of Naples,England's bloody scourge!
The sons of York, thybetters in their birth,
Shall be their father'sbail; and bane to those
That for my surety willrefuse the boys!
See where they come: I'llwarrant they'll make it good.
And here comes Clifford todeny their bail.
Health and all happinessto my lord the king!
I thank thee, Clifford:say, what news with thee?
Nay, do not fright us withan angry look;
We are thy sovereign,Clifford, kneel again;
For thy mistaking so, wepardon thee.
This is my king, York, Ido not mistake;
But thou mistakest me muchto think I do:
To Bedlam with him! is theman grown mad?
Ay, Clifford; a bedlam andambitious humour
Makes him oppose himselfagainst his king.
He is a traitor; let himto the Tower,
And chop away thatfactious pate of his.
He is arrested, but willnot obey;
His sons, he says, shallgive their words for him.
Will you not, sons?
Ay, noble father, if ourwords will serve.
And if words will not,then our weapons shall.
Why, what a brood oftraitors have we here!
Look in a glass, and callthy image so:
I am thy king, and thou afalse-heart traitor.
Call hither to the stakemy two brave bears,
That with the very shakingof their chains
They may astonish thesefell-lurking curs:
Bid Salisbury and Warwickcome to me.
Are these thy bears? we'llbait thy bears to death.
And manacle the bear-wardin their chains,
If thou darest bring themto the baiting place.
Oft have I seen a hoto'erweening cur
Run back and bite, becausehe was withheld;
Who, being suffer'd withthe bear's fell paw,
Hath clapp'd his tailbetween his legs and cried:
And such a piece ofservice will you do,
If you oppose yourselvesto match Lord Warwick.
Hence, heap of wrath, foulindigested lump,
As crooked in thy mannersas thy shape!
Nay, we shall heed youthoroughly anon.
Take heed, lest by yourheat you burn yourselves.
Why, Warwick, hath thyknee forgot to bow?
Old Salisbury, shame tothy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thybrain-sick son!
O, where is faith? O,where is loyalty?
If it be banish'd from thefrosty head,
Where shall it find aharbour in the earth?
Wilt thou go dig a graveto find out war,
And shame thine honourableage with blood?
Why art thou old, andwant'st experience?
Or wherefore dost abuseit, if thou hast it?
For shame! in duty bendthy knee to me
That bows unto the gravewith mickle age.
My lord, I have consider'dwith myself
The title of this mostrenowned duke;
And in my conscience dorepute his grace
The rightful heir toEngland's royal seat.
Hast thou not swornallegiance unto me?
I have.
Canst thou dispense withheaven for such an oath?
It is great sin to swearunto a sin,
But greater sin to keep asinful oath.
Who shall be bound by anysolemn vow
To do a murderous deed, torob a man,
To force a spotlessvirgin's chastity,
To reave the orphan of hispatrimony,
To wring the widow fromher custom'd right,
And have no other reasonfor this wrong
But that he was bound by asolemn oath?
A subtle traitor needs nosophister.
Call Buckingham, and bidhim arm himself.
Call Buckingham, and allthe friends thou hast,
Both thou and they shall cursethis fatal hour.
I am resolved for death ordignity.
The first I warrant thee,if dreams prove true.
You were best to go to bedand dream again,
To keep thee from thetempest of the field.
I am resolved to bear agreater storm
Than any thou canstconjure up to-day;
And so to arms, victoriousfather,
To quell the rebels andtheir complices.
Fie! charity, for shame!speak not in spite,
For you shall sup withJesu Christ to-night.
Foul stigmatic, that'smore than thou canst tell.
If not in heaven, you'llsurely sup in hell.
(drums sounding)
Clifford of Cumberland,'tis Warwick calls:
And if thou dost not hidethee from the bear,
Now, when the angrytrumpet sounds alarum
And dead men's cries dofill the empty air,
Clifford, I say, comeforth and fight with me:
Proud northern lord,Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse withcalling thee to arms.
Of one or both of us thetime is come.
Hold, Warwick, seek theeout some other chase,
For I myself must huntthis deer to death.
Then, nobly, York; 'tisfor a crown thou fight'st.
As I intend, Clifford, tothrive to-day,
It grieves my soul toleave thee unassail'd.
What seest thou in me,York? why dost thou pause?
With thy brave bearingshould I be in love,
But that thou art so fastmine enemy.
Nor should thy prowesswant praise and esteem,
But that 'tis shownignobly and in treason.
So let it help me nowagainst thy sword
As I in justice and trueright express it.
My soul and body on theaction both!
A dreadful lay! Addressthee instantly.
The end crowns all.
Thus war hath given theepeace, for thou art still.
Peace with his soul,heaven, if it be thy will!
(battle cries)
Shame and confusion! allis on the rout;
Fear frames disorder, anddisorder wounds
Where it should guard. Owar, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do maketheir minister
Throw in the frozen bosomsof our part
Hot coals of vengeance!
Let no soldier fly. He thatis truly dedicate to war
Hath no self-love, nor hethat loves himself
Hath not essentially butby circumstance
The name of valour.
O, let the vile world end,
And the premised flames ofthe last day
Knit earth and heaventogether!
Now let the generaltrumpet blow his blast,
Particularities and pettysounds
To cease!
Wast thou ordain'd,dear father,
To lose thy youth inpeace, and to achieve
The silver livery ofadvised age,
And, in thy reverence andthy chair-days, thus
To die in ruffian battle?Even at this sight
My heart is turn'd tostone: and while 'tis mine,
It shall be stony. Yorknot our old men spares;
No more will I theirbabes: tears virginal
Shall be to me even as thedew to fire,
And beauty that the tyrantoft reclaims
Shall to my flaming wrathbe oil and flax.
Henceforth I will not haveto do with pity:
Meet I an infant of thehouse of York,
Into as many gobbets willI cut it
As wild Medea youngAbsyrtus did:
In cruelty will I seek outmy fame.
Come, thou new ruin of oldClifford's house:
As did AEneas old Anchisesbear,
So bear I thee upon mymanly shoulders;
But then AEneas bare aliving load,
Nothing so heavy as thesewoes of mine.
So, lie thou there;
For underneath analehouse' paltry sign,
The Castle in SaintAlban's, Somerset
Hath made the wizardfamous in his death.
Sword, hold thy temper;heart, be wrathful still:
Priests pray for enemies,but princes kill.
Away, my lord! you areslow; for shame, away!
Can we outrun the heavens?good Margaret, stay.
What are you made of?you'll nor fight nor fly:
Now is it manhood, wisdomand defence,
To give the enemy way, andto secure us
By what we can, which canno more but fly.
If you be ta'en, we thenshould see the bottom
Of all our fortunes: butif we haply scape,
As well we may, if notthrough your neglect,
We shall to London get,where you are loved
And where this breach nowin our fortunes made
May readily be stopp'd.
But that my heart's onfuture mischief set,
I would speak blasphemyere bid you fly:
But fly you must;uncurable discomfit
Reigns in the hearts ofall our present parts.
Away, for your relief! andwe will live
To see their day and themour fortune give:
Away, my lord, away!
Of Salisbury, who canreport of him,
That winter lion, who inrage forgets
Aged contusions and allbrush of time,
And, like a gallant in thebrow of youth,
Repairs him with occasion?This happy day
Is not itself, nor have wewon one foot,
If Salisbury be lost.
My noble father,
Three times to-day I holphim to his horse,
Three times bestrid him;thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from anyfurther act:
But still, where dangerwas, still there I met him;
And like rich hangings ina homely house,
So was his will in his oldfeeble body.
(drums sound)
But, noble as he is, lookwhere he comes.
Now, by my sword, wellhast thou fought to-day;
By the mass, so did weall. I thank you, Richard:
God knows how long it is Ihave to live;
And it hath pleased himthat three times to-day
You have defended me fromimminent death.
Well, lords, we have notgot that which we have:
'Tis not enough our foesare this time fled,
Being opposites of suchrepairing nature.
I know our safety is tofollow them;
For, as I hear, the kingis fled to London,
To call a present court ofparliament.
Let us pursue him ere thewrits go forth.
What says Lord Warwick?shall we after them?
After them! nay, beforethem, if we can.
Now, by my faith, lords,'twas a glorious day:
Saint Alban's battle wonby famous York
Shall be eternized in allage to come.
Sound drums and trumpets,and to London all:
And more such days asthese to us befall!
(drums sound)